{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Oblique;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Palatino-Bold;\f4\froman\fcharset0 Palatino-Roman;\f5\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-BoldOblique;
\f6\froman\fcharset0 Palatino-Italic;\f7\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 																	
\f1\b\fs72 A						
\f0\b0\fs24 a		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 E						
\f0\b0\fs24 e		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 G						
\f0\b0\fs24 g		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 H						
\f0\b0\fs24 h		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 I						
\f0\b0\fs24 i		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 K						
\f0\b0\fs24 k		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 L						
\f0\b0\fs24 l		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 M						
\f0\b0\fs24 m		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 N						
\f0\b0\fs24 n		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 P						
\f0\b0\fs24 p		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 Q						
\f0\b0\fs24 q		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 R						
\f0\b0\fs24 r		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 S						
\f0\b0\fs24 s		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 T						
\f0\b0\fs24 t		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 U						
\f0\b0\fs24 u		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 V						
\f0\b0\fs24 v		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 W						
\f0\b0\fs24 w		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 Y						
\f0\b0\fs24 y		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 Z						
\f0\b0\fs24 yz		\
																									\
																									\
																									\
																									\
																									\
																									\
																									\
																									\
																									\
																									\
a	f	oh!		
\f2\i particle; expresses surprise;
\f0\i0  a, taawa \'91oh, there it is\'92; a, ima aviituq \'91oh, it's not there anymore\'92													oh!			19			a	a	\uc0\u1072 \
aa1	6\'a1	darn!		
\f2\i particle; pronounced with breathy voice to indicate exasperation													
\f0\i0 darn!		PE a(a)	19			a1	x1	\uc0\u257 1\

\f1\b aa\super 2\nosupersub , aa-a	
\f0\b0 6\super \'99\nosupersub . 6-f	yes		
\f2\i particle; an expression of approval or agreement
\f0\i0 ; aanaqsiin? \'91are you going out?\'92 -- aa \'91yes\'92													yes		PE a(a)&	19			a2	x2	\uc0\u257 2, \u257 -\u1072 \
aafkagh-	6arf4-	burst		aafkaghtuq \'91it burst\'92; aafkaghaa \'91he burst it\'92 / Maalghuk ighuk ugugnaghaam ighukek neghumakek. Taagken aghnam pimakanga, aqsanga kenegraamaan, "Kaay aqsan 
\f2\i aafkaghllequq
\f0\i0 ." \'91He ate two legs, hind-quarters of the shrew. Then the woman said to him, while poking at his stomach, \'93Hey, your stomach will 
\f2\i burst
\f0\i0 .\'94 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 80)													to burst		< aveg-qagh-			aafkaneghlluk	afkagh-	xfkagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aafkaneghlluk	6arfys5k]/r	durable material that will not burst											esp. of pneumatic things as Rub. 109 says? check				durable material that will not burst	ghjxysq \'f8j yfledyjv ghtlvtnt\uc0\u960 	< aafkagh-neghlluk				afkaneghlluk	xfkaneghlluk	\u257 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
aafqugh-	6a2e4-	set things aside			divide things into groups												to set things aside; to divide things into groups		< aafte-qugh-				afqugh-	xfqugh-	\uc0\u257 \u1092 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
aafte-	6ans-	separate from others		aaftuq \'91he separated himself from the others\'92; aaftaa \'91he separated it from the others, took it from where it was, put it aside\'92 / aafutut \'91they separated from each other\'92; = afte-													to separate from others		PE av0t- (under PE av0!-)			aafqugh-	afte-	xfte-	\uc0\u257 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aag-	6u-	side trip (take a ~)		aagtuq \'91he made a side trip\'92; aagaa \'91he went over to it while on his way to somewhere else\'92 / aagvik \'91the place to which one makes a side trip\'92; Sangwaa taakwagun 
\f2\i aagaqegkan
\f0\i0 , tuqutaqigu. \'91If something 
\f2\i happens to come by 
\f0\i0  this way, kill it.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 62)													to take a side trip		PE a!0-			aaghqaghte-, aaghqutaq, aaghqutaate-, aagute-	ag-	xg-	\uc0\u257 \u1075 -\
aaga-	6uf-	swing		aagaaq \'91it swung\'92 / aagastaa \'91he made it swing\'92, \'91he pushed her on the swing\'92; 
\f2\i Aagastaqa
\f0\i0  qevulliighaatekestaamaan 
\f2\i aagalghiinaakun
\f0\i0 . \'91I began to push her on the 
\f2\i swing
\f0\i0  a little more with each back and forth 
\f2\i swinging
\f0\i0  motion.\'92 (SULUWET 16)													to swing						aga-	xga-	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1072 -\
aageste- 	6uscns-	prolong one's action for a long time		aagestuq \'91he let out a long moan or kept his action going for a long time\'92 / qinuyulghii aagestaataghtuq unulqusiq elngaatall \'91the sick one let out long painful cries throughout the night\'92; mekelghiighhaq aagestaataghtuq qiyatkelluku \'91the little boy prolonged his wailing as he cried\'92; qepghallghegni aaghestaak yugem taawa \'91oh my, the man is keeping at his work for as long as he can\'92	moan long and mournfully 												to prolong one's action for a long time; to moan long and mournfully 						ageste- 	xgeste- 	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aaggaatae	6[6nfs	whetstone			sharpening stone												whetstone; sharpening stone		PE a!i!(a3)un (under PE a!i!-); < aaggagh-(u)n				aggatae	xggxtae	\uc0\u257 \u1093 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \
aaggagh-	6[f4-	sharpen			whet												to sharpen; to whet		PE a!i!-			aaggaata	aggagh-	xggagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1093 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aaggnaqe-	6[y]f2s-	use sparingly			economize	sparingly (use ~)							check; looks like a nice base that somehow got omitted -- does CK know this word?				to use sparingly; to economize	\'e6rjyjvbnm xnj-k>			Rub. 112		aggnaqe-	xggnaqe-	\uc0\u257 \u1093 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aaghhaghte-	65f5ns-	move a little by force		aaghhaghtuq \'91it budged, he changed his mind\'92; aaghhaghtaa \'91he budged it, he changed her mind\'92 / nuna aaghhaghtuq \'91the ground moved, there was an earthquake\'92; nguutnguga alangqughiitama aaghhaghluku ilefkaghaghsimaaqa \'91I made the stone in my ring come loose and fall out\'92; aaghhaghsaghqaghhaanghilnguq yuuk qenwatlu taawa malikruutesimaat \'91they finally persuaded that very stubborn man to go along with their ideas\'92	change one's mind	budge								earthquake (there is an ~)			to move a little by force; to budge; to change one's mind; for there to be an earthquake		< aaghte-aghte-				aghhaghte-	xghhaghte-	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aaghhe-	65s-	move freely (as a rope being pulled, or a person's behavior)		aaghhuq \'91it (rope) is running free; he (person) is not being restrained nor restraining himself\'92 / aaghhestaa \'91he is letting it run free\'92; aaghhestaa uyiiq aghveq awatmun igleghsan \'91he let the whale rope flow out as the whale moved away\'92; aaghhuq yuuk taana qepghaqamini avelghaqiinaghluki ilani piyukellghinaghmitun \'91that man is getting away with doing whatever he wishes with complete disregard for his co-workers\'92; aaghhestaat taana taghnughhaq elngaatall \'91they certainly are giving that child free rein\'92	slacken												to move freely (as a rope being pulled, or a person's behavior); to slacken					aaghheghneq	aghhe-	xghhe-	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1099 -\
aaghheghneq	65s4ys2	persuaded (person that can easily be ~)															person that can easily be persuaded		< aaghhe-?-neq\super 2		\nosupersub CK Rub 118		aghheghneq	xghheghneq	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aaghhneghlliqe-	65y]s5k]b2s-	stubborn (be ~)		Tawaten ataasimi aghneghmi Kiiluuq 
\f2\i aaghhneghlliqumalghii
\f0\i0  esnamun samavek elqwaaghyaghnaluni.\'92 Then one day Kiiluuq being 
\f2\i stubborn
\f0\i0  went down to the shore to gather seaweed.\'92 (KIILUUQ 3)													to be stubborn		< aaghhneghhlluk-liqe-				aghhneghlliqe-	xghhneghlliqe-	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aaghhneghlluk	65y]s5k]/r	stubborn person			hard to convince (one who is ~)	skeptical person											one who is hard to convince; stubborn person; skeptical person		< aaghte\super 2\nosupersub -neghlluk			aaghhneghlliqe-	aghhneghlluk	xghhneghlluk	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
aaghhutagh-	65enf4-	move by crawling over thin ice		piyaalghii iikusati aaghhutameng aghviimalghii \'91the man who was hunting by foot crossed by drawling  over the thing ice when the cake of ice he was on broke off from the main ice													to move by crawling over thin ice		< aaghwe-?-		VK\'92s dict. revs.		aghhutagh-	xghhutagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aaghhwe-	651s-	crawl		aaghhuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aaghhwuq \'91he crawled\'92; aaghhwaa \'91he crawled over it\'92 / aaghhwaaghtuq \'91he keeps crawling\'92; Repall atanga 
\f2\i aaghhweregaghmeng
\f0\i0  aanumalghii, llangaqa pingayuneng ighukelghii. \'91The father went out 
\f2\i crawling
\f0\i0 , looking like he had three legs.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 72)													to crawl		PE a9u3-				aghhwe-	xghhwe-	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1265 \u1099 -\
aaghlu	64k/	meteor		
\f2\i traditionally thought to be connected with a creature dwelling in the rocks behind Gambell; the color is said to be prophetic	
\f0\i0 comet	fireball of some sort coming down from mountains											fireball of some sort coming down from mountains (perhaps meteor or comet)				comet meaning is from Linda Badten; fireball meaning from Darlene Orr		aghlu	xghlu	\uc0\u257 \u1271 \u1083 \u1102 \

\f1\b aaghqaghte-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 652f5ns-\super \'a1	\nosupersub detour		aaghqaghtuq \'91he went a different way\'92; aaghqaghtaa \'91he didn\'92t stop at it\'92 / taagagun aaghqaghsimaaq \'91he went by the far side instead\'92; aaghqaghtaa tapghaq \'91he put the rope around that part\'92	avoid	put rope around something											to take a route different from usual; to detour; to avoid; to evade; to put rope around or across something		< aag-qaghte-				aghqaghte-	xghqaghte-	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub aaghqaghte-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 652f5ns-\super \'99	\nosupersub urge		aaghqaghtuq \'91he went a different way\'92; aaghqaghtaa \'91he didn\'92t stop at it\'92 / taagagun aaghqaghsimaaq \'91he went by the far side instead\'92; aaghqaghtaa tapghaq \'91he put the rope around that part\'92	encourage												to urge; to encourage		< aaghte\super 2\nosupersub -qaghte-				aghqaghte-2	xghqaghte-2	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub aaghqutaate-	652en6ns-	detour		aaghqutaatestegpenasi seghletun pinaqelghiinun \'91don't let them tell you what to do when they are doing wrong\'92	decide for someone without giving him a say												to detour; to decide for someone without giving him a say		< aag-?-				aghqutate-	xghqutxte-	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aaghqutaq	652enf2	ball game		
\f2\i Chukotkan; called 
\f0\i0 kalleghta 
\f2\i by most people on St. Lawrence Island													
\f0\i0 a certain ball game		< aag-qutaq				aghqutaq	xghqutaq	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aaghqute-	652ens-	comply with the wishes of another		aaghqutaa \'91he did as she wanted\'92 /													to comply with the wishes of another		< aaghte-?-				aghqute-	xghqute-	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aaghsi	65cb	thong holding shank
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 to harpoon shaft		= aghsi									or aghsi? (Yupik Lore vol. 1 p. 170-174 has it both ways; curriculum manual only as aaghsi)				thong holding shank 
\f2\i (giimaq) 
\f0\i0 to harpoon shaft					; 
\f2\i see Parts of Harpoon in Appendix	
\f0\i0 aghsi	xghsi	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \
aaghte-
\f3\b \super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 65ns-\'a1	move a little			change one's mind	budge								earthquake (there is an ~)			to move a little; to budge; to change one's mind; for there to be an earthquake					aaghhaghte-	aghte-1	xghte-1	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\
\nosupersub aaghte-
\f3\b \super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 65ns-\'99	convince		aaghtaa \'91he convinced her\'92/													to convince					aaghtiiraagh-, aaghqute-, aaghneghlluk	aghte-2	xghte-2	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub aaghtiiraagh-	65n7h64-	argue															to argue		< aaghte\super 2\nosupersub -iiraagh-				aghtiragh-	xghtxrxgh-	\uc0\u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1251 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
aaghw-	641-	upside down		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  aaghwtuq \'91it turned upside down\'92; aaghwtaa \'91he turned it upside down\'92; aaghwngaaq \'91it is upside down\'92; qayuutat ayumiq aaghwtaaghtestesnanighaqiit \'91long ago they discouraged people from leaving wooden platters upside down\'92 
\f2\i (probably a superstition)													
\f0\i0 upside down			12			aghw-	xghw-	\uc0\u257 \u1271 \u1265 -\
aaghwqe-	6412s-	bloody (get ~)		aaghwquq \'91he got bloody\'92; aaghwqaa \'91he got it bloody\'92 /													to get bloody		< aakw-ghqe-				aghwqe-	xghwqe-	\uc0\u257 \u1271 \u1265 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aaghwtaq	615nf2	tent with arched roof		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)	
\f0\i0 house (wooden ~ type with arched roof covered with hide)												tent with a arched roof; wooden house type with arched roof covered with hide	ktnyzz zhfyuf c gjkerheukjq rhsitq\\ lthtdzyyjt ;bkbot cjdhtvtyyjuj j,hfpwf			CK V & E 81; Rub 108		aghwtaq	xghwtaq	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aagna	6uyf	over there (that one ~)		
\f2\i extended demonstrative pronoun;
\f0\i0  
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  ag-; 
\f2\i localis singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 agum \'91at the one over there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative singular: 
\f0\i0  aagyuq \'91you, going away\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun:
\f0\i0  aagkut \'91those over there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun:
\f0\i0  taagna \'91that one over there\'92; 
\f2\i adverbial particle:
\f0\i0  aga \'91over there!\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 agani \'91over there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  agavek \'91to over there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb:
\f0\i0  aaggun \'91through over there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb:
\f0\i0  aagken \'91from over there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric adverbial particle: 
\f0\i0 taaga \'91there, over there!\'92; aagna qilaga pinipigta \'91how nice the sky looks over there!\'92; aagna uyavaq meq imaghllugituq taaga \'91the sea farther up beyond us is not rough at all\'92; aagna yuuk angvigapigta \'91how tall that person who is going away is!\'92; aagna igleghlleghhii qemimelnguq yugaa? \'91is that thing moving up on that hill a person?\'92	going away (one ~)												that one over there; that one going away		PE dem. a!-	22			agna	xgna	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
aagneghaghte-	6uys4f5ns-	split at the crotch		aagneghaghtuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  (pants) split at the crotch\'92; aagneghaghtaak \'91he split them\sub 2\nosupersub  at the crotch\'92 /													to split at the crotch		< aagneq-aghte-				agneghaghte-	xgneghaghte-	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aagneghtu-	6uys5ne-	steps (have long ~)			long (have ~ steps or a ~ stride)	stride (have a long ~)											to have long steps; to have a long stride		< aagneq-tu-				agneghtu-	xgneghtu-	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 -\
aagneq	6uys2	crotch of pants		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 aagneghek
\f2\i , for one crotch	
\f0\i0 pace (one ~)	step (one ~)											crotch of pants; one pace; one step		+PY a!n03 \'91a certain distance\'92 (under PE a!0- \'91)(cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik a!n03 \'91a mile\'92s distance\'92; Naukan Yupik a!n0q \'91crotch of pants, measure of length\'92)			aagneghaghte-, aagneghtu-	agneq	xgneq	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aagra	6uhf	room, insulated inner, of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Aagram
\f0\i0  ilungi puqlaghllagulghiit, aghnat ilungani raarwiighesnaghluteng ayuqelghiit sungighluteng, tangyeghusighluteng, tukughusighluteng. \'91Because inside the 
\f2\i inner room
\f0\i0  women are quite warm they wear only underwear plus beads, bracelets and anklets.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:33); aagra is 
\f2\i termed
\f0\i0  polog \'91bed canopy\'92
\f2\i  in Russian	
\f0\i0 inner insulated room of the traditional dome-shaped house								; 
\f2\i see Parts of Traditional House in Appendix				
\f0\i0 insulated inner room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		from Chukchi a!ran \'91wooden floor\'92	14			agra	xgra	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \
aagralghun	6uhfk4ey	guyline at corner of the insulated
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 inner room of traditional dome-shaped house											
\f2\i see Parts of Traditional House in Appendix				
\f0\i0 guyline at corner of the 
\f2\i aagra, 
\f0\i0 the
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		from Chukchi aa!ran and ?	19	CK Rub 45		agralghun	xgralghun	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
aagriin	6uh7y	ridgepole supporting the insulated
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 inner room of traditional dome-shaped house											
\f2\i see Parts of Traditional House in Appendix				
\f0\i0 ridgepole supporting the 
\f2\i aagra, 
\f0\i0 the
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 insulatedinner room of traditional dome-shaped house		from Chukchi a!rot\'920m \'91(?)\'92		CK Rub 25		agrin	xgrxn	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1088 \u1251 \u1085 \
aagtagh-	6[nf4-	shoot at even though from a distance		neghsaq nuulghii aatak aagtaghyaghaqa \'91I tried shooting at the seal even though it was far away\'92													to shoot at even though from a distance		PY a!ta3- (under PE a!0-)		VK		agtagh-	xgtagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aagte-
\f3\b \super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 6[ns-\'a1	prolong one's action		= aageste-													to prolong one's action						agte-1	xgte-1	\uc0\u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\
\nosupersub aagte-
\f3\b \super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 6[ns-\'99	stumble		= naagte-	trip (stumble)												to stumble; to trip						agte-2	xgte-2	\uc0\u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub aagte-
\f3\b \super 3	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 6[ns-\'a3	secret (keep something ~)			let something pass without mentioning it												to keep something secret; to let something pass without mentioning it						agte-3	xgte-3	\uc0\u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 3\
\nosupersub aagute-	6uens-	bump into something		aagutuq \'91he bumped into something\'92; aagutaa \'91he bumped into it\'92, \'91he made a side trip for it\'92 /	make a side trip for (it)												to bump into something; to make a side trip for (it)		< aag-(u)te-				agute-	xgute-	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aagyug-	6um/u-			
\f2\i root: 
\f0\i0 > aagyugneq, aagyugniqe-, aagyugteste-																			agyug-	xgyug-	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
aagyugneq	6um/uys2	persistent person		aagyugneghutmineng qepghaqanguq \'91he landed himself a job due to his being a persistent person\'92													persistent person		< aagyug-neq\super 2				\nosupersub agyugneq	xgyugneq	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aagyugniqe-	6um/uyb2s-	stubborn (be ~)			persistent (be ~)												to be stubborn or persistent		< aagyugneq-liqe-		VK		agyugniqe-	xgyugniqe-	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aagyugteste-	6um/[nscns-	stubborn (make (him) ~)		ugumiyugsaghluku milughmilghii aagyugtestaa \'91he provoked him so he continued to throw rocks\'92	provoke												to make (him) stubborn; to provoke		< aagyug-(te)ste-		VK		agyugteste-	xgyugteste-	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aagyugutke-	6um/uenrs-	pick on		aagyugutkaa \'91he picked on him\'92 / alingtalghii aagyugutkaat alingseghaghaqluku \'91they picked on the person who is easily frightened by trying to scare him\'92													to pick on				VK		agyugutke-	xgyugutke-	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
aahaaleketiiq	6u6ksrsn72	game involving coiled lines drawn on the ground which one follows from the outside inward as a particular song is sung															a game involving coiled lines drawn on the ground which one follows from the outside inward as a particular song is sung						ahaleketiq	xhxleketxq	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u257 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1251 \u1179 \
aahaangwliq	6u613kb2	oldsquaw duck		
\f2\i the true name of the oldsquaw is said to be 
\f0\i0 kangghwaak, 
\f2\i while the present word is a sort of nickname based on the cry of the oldsquaw	Clangula hyemalis	
\f0\i0 cry of the oldsquaw											oldsquaw duck (Clangula hyemalis); the cry of the oldsquaw		PE a(a)-a(a)&li3	02			ahangwliq	xhxngwliq	\uc0\u257 \u1075 \u257 \u1265 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
aakaq*	6rf2	sister (older ~ of female)			older sister of female												older sister of female		PE a(a)ka3	18			akaq*	xkaq*	\uc0\u257 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
aakw	61r	blood		aawa \'91his blood\'92, aakwa \'91my blood\'92; aawuuq \'91it is blood\'92; 
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  aaw- \'91to bleed\'92													blood		PE a9u!	10		aaghwqe-, aakwrak, aangwunani, aaghwtu-, aawhtuqe-, aawite-, aawiite-, aawyaq	akw	xkw	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1082 \
aakwrak	61rifr	blood (small spot or streak of ~)															small spot or streak of blood		< aakw-krak				akwrak	xkwrak	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
aalghaq	6k4f2	family (another) in the same clan			other of a pair of boats cooperating in a hunt	hunting partner								second wife			another family in the same clan; the other of a pair of boats cooperating in a hunt; hunting partner; second wife		< aleq-ghaq (?)				alghaq	xlghaq	\uc0\u257 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
Aallgha aghneq	^k]5f f4ys2	Monday		
\f2\i the name comes from Monday being the second day of the week													
\f0\i0 Monday		< aleq + aghneq				Allgha aghneq	Xllgha aghneq	\uc0\u1040 \u772 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1072  \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aallgutaq	6k][enf2	broom		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); may be used in the plural for a single broom	
\f0\i0 besom	wing of bird used as a broom							known and used on SLI?				broom; besom; wing of bird used as a broom	jnhtpfyyfz xfcnm rhskf e gnbwsdtybr	< alleg-(u)taq		Rub. 63		allgutaq	xllgutaq	\uc0\u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aallneq	6k]y]s2	ember			soot with grease from an oil lamp												ember; soot with grease from an oil lamp						allneq	xllneq	\uc0\u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aallngunaan	6k]3]ey6y	without a partner		
\f2\i irregular subordinative of 
\f0\i0 aallghite-
\f2\i  (rather than 
\f0\i0 aallghinaan 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aallghunaan
\f2\i )	
\f0\i0 partnerless												without a partner		< aleq-(ng)ite-
\f2\i subordinative				
\f0\i0 allngunan	xllngunxn	\uc0\u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1085 \
aalma	6kvf	block of snow to be used in a heated house		
\f2\i perhaps to cool the house (?)	
\f0\i0 snow block to be used in a heated house								what exactly does this mean???				block of snow to be used in a heated house	recjr cytuf. gjkj;tysq lkz entgktybz ;bkbof	from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 59		alma	xlma	\uc0\u257 \u1083 \u1084 \u1072 \
aalqullghiik	6k]2ek]57r	pair			couple	companion (person and ~)											pair; couple; person and companion		< aleq-ke\super 1\nosupersub -(u)te-lghii-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 alqullghik	xlqullghxk	\uc0\u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1251 \u1082 \
aam	6v	hesitation sound like English "aah" or "um"		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 hesitation sound like English "aah" or "um"			19			am	xm	\uc0\u257 \u1084 \
aamak	6vfr	berry species		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined									
\f0\i0 what kind?; cf. CAY aumaq, aumak \'91ember\'92; where is this from? -- I can find no record or other reference to it; spurious?				a kind of berry			07			amak	xmak	\uc0\u257 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \
aamna	6vyf	over there or over the mountains (one ~)		
\f2\i obscured demonstrative pronoun; base:
\f0\i0  am-; 
\f2\i localis singular pronoun:
\f0\i0  amumi \'91in the one on the other side\'92; 
\f2\i vocative singular: 
\f0\i0 aamyuq \'91you, on the other side\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun:
\f0\i0  aamkut \'91those on the other side\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: 
\f0\i0 taamna \'91that one on the other side\'92; 
\f2\i adverbial particle:
\f0\i0  ama \'91over there (on the other side)!\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  amani \'91on the other side\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb: 
\f0\i0 amavek \'91to the other side\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 amagun or aamggun \'91through the other side\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb: 
\f0\i0 amaken 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aamken \'91from the other side\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric adverbial particle:
\f0\i0  taama \'91there, on the other side!\'92	across the sea (one ~)	on the other side (one ~ of something)								in the other room (one ~)			that one over there; the one across the sea; that one on the other side of something; that one over the mountains; that one in the other room		PE dem. am-	22			amna	xmna	\uc0\u257 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
aamqun	6v2ey	welt put in between the boot sole and the upper on a skin-boot		
\f2\i Aamqutnguut
\f0\i0  nateghqamllu amiiramllu akulanganilnguut \'85. \'91There was a 
\f2\i welt
\f0\i0  [put] between the sole and upper [of the boot] \'85.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:114) 													welt put in between the boot sole and the upper on a skin-boot		< ?-(u)n				amqun	xmqun	\uc0\u257 \u1084 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
aamta	6vnf	as we know from our experience, or as we well understand		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  aamta ellngitlu aghneghmi amighinaqaqeftut whangkutestun \'91they are putting a skin on their boat today just as we are\'92; aamta ellngitlu seghleliightut taawa \'91oh, they are grieving greatly (a feeling we understand all too well)\'92; Mekelghiighuluteng, apangiighhaghputlu aagna, apangiighhaghputlu 
\f2\i aamta 
\f0\i0 entaqun seghleghllugumayaghtuq.  \'91Being boys, our little grandfather too, that one, our little grandfather also, 
\f2\i as we know
\f0\i0  maybe he would try to be bad (be mischievous).\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:24)									aamtaam, aamtawha, aamtayaghhaq 				as we know from our experience; as we well understand		from Chukchi \'910mto, amto \'91well, what if, what news?\'92				amta	xmta	\uc0\u257 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \
aamtaam	6vn6v	if that can't be		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  tawani tagilghaaten utaqanaaghamken taawanginaq enkaam aamtaam pipagningiskuvek ungipaannakevnga kitukun \'91come at that time and I'll wait for you, but if you can't, let me know through someone\'92; tagilghaaten, aamtaam wiin piyunghilkuvek taginghisaghngaaghpek \'91do come over, but if you don't want to, then don't\'92; taginghisaghngaaghpek aamtaam tagiyukuvek tagilghaaten \'91you don't have to come, but if you want to come, then come\'92; 
\f2\i Aamtaam
\f0\i0  eltughaanka pillgitngwaaghtut. \'91
\f2\i That being so, 
\f0\i0 my grandchildren treasure the things they have.\'92 (Sivuq. Nangagh. 3:94); Taawanginaq whanganginanghitunga, anengalguunga. 
\f2\i Aamtaam
\f0\i0  ighlekegkaanganga ugiighnaanghitunga. 
\f2\i Aamtaam
\f0\i0  aangqanganga ugiighllequnga. \'91It\'92s not only me, I have an older brother. 
\f2\i That being the case
\f0\i0 , if he doesn\'92t let me I won\'92t marry you. 
\f2\i That being the case
\f0\i0 , if he does agree I will marry you.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 20)	if that isn't so	if that is so								that being the case			if that can't be; if that isn't so; if that is so; that being the case		< aamta-am	14, 19			amtam	xmtxm	\uc0\u257 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1084 \
aamtawha	6vnf1]f	maybe		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  aamtawha kiigunneghatni quugmeng suyvaghtuq imawha uksungani naangut \'91he would try to gather enough wood during the summer but would run out in the winter\'92	probably	trying fruitlessly											maybe; probably; trying fruitlessly		< aamta-wha	14, 19			amtawha	xmtawha	\uc0\u257 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \
aamtayaghhaq	6vnfz5f2	how well we know		
\f2\i particle, like
\f0\i0  aamta
\f2\i  (q.v.) but stronger													
\f0\i0 how well we know		< aamta-?-ghhaq	14, 19			amtayaghhaq	xmtayaghhaq	\uc0\u257 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \u1103 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
aane-	6ys-	go out(side)		aanuq \'91he went out\'92; aanaa \'91he went out of it or went out through it / aanutaa he took it out\'92	outside (go ~)												to go out(side)		< ane-			aanelgun, aanleghagh-, aanqaghte-, aante-, aanvik, aanyaghaq, aanziiq	ane-	xne-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1099 -\
aanelgun	6yskuey	littermate			born at the same time (one ~)	contemporary (a person\'92s ~)											littermate; one born at the same time; a person's contemporary		< aane-lgum				anelgun	xnelgun	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
aanesqe-	6ysc2s-	drive out		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 expel	force somebody to leave							check; would seem to mean \'91wants or asks one to go out\'92				to drive out; to expel; to force somebody to leave	dsujyznm rjuj-k>. pfcnfdkznm rjuj-k> dsqnb	< aane-sqe-		Rub. 80		anesqe-	xnesqe-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aanestaghagh-	6yscnf4f4-	press out		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 squeeze out	put out								thrust out			to press or squeeze out; to put or thrust out	dslfdkbdfnm gjytvyjue xnj-kb,j. dscjdsdfnm xnj-k> 	< aane-(te)ste-?-		Rub. 80		anestaghagh-	xnestaghagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aangaayugte-	636/[ns-	act as if superior to others			airs (put on ~)	put on airs								conceited (act ~)			to act as if superior to others; to put on airs; to act conceited		< aange-?-				angayugte-	xngxyugte-	\uc0\u257 \u1187 \u257 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aangeaa-	63s-	big (be ~)		aanguq \'91it is big\'92	large (be ~)												to be big; to be large		< ange-			aangeghllak	ange-	xnge-	\uc0\u257 \u1187 \u1099 -\
aangeghllak	63s5k]zr	big thing			large thing												big thing; large thing		< aange-ghllak 
\f2\i (note that this normally noun-elaborating postbase is used here with a verb base)				
\f0\i0 angeghllak	xngeghllak	\uc0\u257 \u1187 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
aanghuute-	6y48ns-	spark as from friction		aanghuutuq \'91it made sparks\'92 / Uyghagami qamiyegka 
\f2\i aanghuutuk
\f0\i0  igleghsama.\'92 My sled 
\f2\i made sparks
\f0\i0  as I was going over the rocks.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 5)	make sparks												to spark as from friction; to make sparks		 < aneq-uute-				anghute-	xnghxte-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1271 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aangqagh-	632f4-	play ball													 		to play ball		< angqagh-				angqagh-	xngqagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Aangqaghvik	^32f4dbr	June			July												June; July				in E-V, and also anonymous SLI 1910; VK		Angqaghvik	Xngqaghvik	\uc0\u1040 \u772 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
aangqanneq	632fy]s2	ball game		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)									
\f0\i0 should this actually be aangqaanneq?				traditional ball game	nhflbwbjyyfz buhf d vzx	< aangqaq-?-neq\super 1		\nosupersub CK V & E 98		angqanneq	xngqanneq	\uc0\u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aangqaq	632f2	ball															ball	vzx	< angqagh-				angqaq	xngqaq	\uc0\u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
aangqasiigh-, aangqasi-	632fc74-. 632fcb-	get ready to throw a ball			wind up (get ready to throw a ball)												to get ready to throw a ball; to "wind up"		< aangqaq-?-				angqasigh-; angqasi-	xngqasxgh-; xngqasi-	\uc0\u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -, \u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 -\
aangqengwaaq	632s3162	rattle, small		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 small rattle		< aangqaq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq (?)		CK Rub 84		angqengwaq	xngqengwxq	\uc0\u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
aangwaagh-	63164-	big (be rather ~, be ~ enough)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; from *aangengwaagh-? (like aanenaquq becomes aanaquq, I think)				to be rather big,  big enough	ljdjkmyj ,jkmijq	< aange-(ngw/ghw/w)aagh- (?)		Rub. 87		angwagh-	xngwxgh-	\uc0\u257 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
aangwunani	631eyfyb	bloodless ((he, she or it) being ~)											check this -- Rub. gives it as aangunani, and in fact can there be a contrast between ng and ngw before u?				(he, she or it) being bloodless		< aakw-(ng)ite-
\f2\i subordinative				
\f0\i0 angwunani	xngwunani	\uc0\u257 \u1187 \u1265 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
aanighte-	6yb5ns-	concentrate thought and action on what one is doing		aanightuq \'91he is concentrating on what he is doing\'92 / aanighutaa \'91he is concentrating on it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  anighte-													to concentrate thought and action on what one is doing						anighte-	xnighte-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aanleghaate-	6yks46ns-	leave a building		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 rise to the surface								check				to leave a building; to rise to the surface	ds[jlbnm bp gjvtotybzdcgksdfnm yf gjdth[yjcnm djls	< aanleghagh-(u)te-		Rub. 78		anleghate-	xnleghxte-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aanleghagh-	6yks4f4-	seep out		aanleghaghtuq \'91it seeped out\'92 / Kagimkaq qantamineng 
\f2\i aanleghaghtuq
\f0\i0  reghilleghqun. \'91Sugar is 
\f2\i leaking out
\f0\i0  of the its container through a hole.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 5)	flow out												to seep out; to flow out		< aane-vleghagh- (?)				anleghagh-	xnleghagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aanngerquq	6y3si2e2	ankle bone		
\f2\i Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0  = angangarquq													ankle bone			10			anngerquq	xnngerquq	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1187 \u1099 \u1096 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
aanqaghneq	6y2f4ys2	bulge			protrusion												bulge; protrusion		< aanqaghte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub anqaghneq	xnqaghneq	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aanqaghreki	632f4hsrb	three (the number ~ in a counting of finger naming jingle for children)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 aangqaq; 
\f2\i the entire jingle is:
\f0\i0  aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'	counting jingle (the number \'91three\'92 in a ~ for children)	jingle (the number \'91three\'92 in a counting or finger naming ~ for children)											the number three (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)						anqaghreki	xnqaghreki	\uc0\u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u1099 \u1082 \u1080 \
aanqaghte-	6y2f5ns-	rush out		aanqaghtuq \'91he rushed out\'92, \'91it protruded\'92 /	protrude	bulge							check; Rub. gives the glosses \'91to drop\'92 and \'91to vote\'92				to rush out; to protrude; to bulge		< aane-qaghte-			aanqaghneq	anqaghte-	xnqaghte-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aanqaghtivike-	6y2f5nsdbrs-	hit accidentally as with a stone from a sling		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; this seems like a very specific meaning				to hit accidentally as with a stone from a sling	gjgflfnm ytxfzyyj d rjuj-k>. dj xnj-k> rfvytv bp ghfob	< aanqaghte-(g)i-vik-ke\super 1\nosupersub -		Rub. 78		anqaghtivike-	xnqaghtivike-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
aanqulleq	6y2ek]s2	manure		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 manure				CK Rub 78		anqulleq	xnqulleq	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aanqutagh-	6y2enf4-	lead singing			sing (lead singing)												to lead singing		< aanqute-?-				anqutagh-	xnqutagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aanqute-	6y2ens-	start singing or speaking		aanqutaa \'91he began (to say, sing) i\'92t / aanqutiiq \'91he began to sing\'92; yugem aanqutisaghaanga kaallunga \'91the man began to say something as he reached me\'92; Ellngan quunpeng 
\f2\i aanqutaqii
\f0\i0  atuutet atulghiini. \'91He always 
\f2\i starts
\f0\i0  the songs for the singers.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 6); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  aane-	sing (start singing or speaking)	speak (start singing or speaking)											to start singing or speaking					aanqutagh-	anqute-	xnqute-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aantaq	6ynf2	midden		
\f2\i may be used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 aantat, 
\f2\i for one midden	
\f0\i0 dump												midden; dump		PE antat (under PE an0-); < aante-(g)aq; 				antaq	xntaq	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aante-	6yns-	take out		aantaa \'91he brought it out\'92 / aantiiq \'91he took something out (particularly a commode for dumping)\'92; pegnem aantaa ighneni \'91she had a difficult time giving birth to her son\'92	bring out	put out								give birth to			to to take out; to bring out; to put out; to give birth to		PE an0t- (under PE an0-); < aane-te\super 1\nosupersub -			aantat	ante-	xnte-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aanvik	6ydbr	outlet			exit												outlet; exit		PE ann0vi! and an09vi! (under PE an0-); < aane-vik				anvik	xnvik	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
aanyaghagh-	6ymz4f4-	go out early			early (go out ~)												to go out early		< aane-yaghagh-				anyaghagh-	xnyaghagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b aanyaghaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 6ymz4f2\super \'a1	\nosupersub first one out			first-born child	first letter of word								initial			first one out; first-born child; man who goes outside the first (in the morning); first letter of word, initial	xtkjdtr. gthddsq dsitlibq bp ljvf yf ekbwe.gthdfz ,erdf d ckjdt	< aane-yaghagh-				anyaghaq1	xnyaghaq1	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b aanyaghaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 6ymz4f2\super \'99	\nosupersub exit		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  aanyaghak, 
\f2\i for one exit or outlet
\f0\i0 ; qaltak aanyaghametuk \'91the bucket is by the exit; kiiwem aanyaghakek uusqaghtuk \'91the water is deep around the outlet of the river\'92	way out	outlet											exit; the way out; outlet						anyaghaq2	xnyaghaq2	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 2\
aanziigh-	6yp74-	burp		aanziightuq \'91he burped\'92; 
\f2\i Aanziighllagyalghiimi
\f0\i0  sayalghiimi, mighyaghllagyalghiimi taghnughhaam akileghteghllagluku, qiyateghllaget. \'91When it (the creature) 
\f2\i belched
\f0\i0 , doubled over, and threw up violently, the children tumbled out from it crying loudly.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:174)	belch												to burp; to belch		< aane-?-				anzigh-	xnzxgh-	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1079 \u1251 \u1271 -\
aanziiq	6yp72	burp			belch												a burp; a belch		< aane-?				anziq	xnzxq	\uc0\u257 \u1085 \u1079 \u1251 \u1179 \
aapghun	6g5ey	prediction		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 sacrifice (object which is to be sacrificed)								check				object which is to be sacrificed; prediction	ghtlvtn. dtom j,tofyyst d ;thnde.ghtlcrfpfybt	< apegh\super 1\nosupersub -(u)n		Rub. 92		apghun	xpghun	\uc0\u257 \u1087 \u1203 \u1091 \u1085 \
aapte-	6gns-	ask		aaptuq \'91he asked\'92; aaptaa \'91he asked her\'92 /													to ask		PY-S ap(0)t0-			aapute-	apte-	xpte-	\uc0\u257 \u1087 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aapute-	6gens-	ask permission		aaputuq \'91he asked for permission\'92; aaputaa \'91he asked her for permission\'92; Ungazighmiit 
\f2\i aaputaqut
\f0\i0  ellmengllu Arctic Ocean-mun pinaluteng. \'91The Siberians would 
\f2\i ask permission 
\f0\i0 (to join), wanting to go to the Arctic Ocean.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:118)	ask concerning someone or something												to ask permission; to ask concerning someone or something		< aapte-(u)te-				apute-	xpute-	\uc0\u257 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aaqun	62ey	almost		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 yuuk sikugni piyugluni aaqun meghquutkaaguq \'91a man walking on the ice practically fell into the water\'92; Taana ivenrumeng kaatevzighaghput, 
\f2\i aaqun
\f0\i0  kaasimaaghput iitek. \'91We almost reached that one with the outboarrd motor; 
\f2\i almost
\f0\i0 , we got to it, indeed.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:34)	practically (almost)				almost; practically				from Chukchi?				almost			14, 19		> aaqunqun	aqun	xqun	\uc0\u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
aaqunqun	62ey2ey	try it anyway		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 dare												try it anyway; dare		< aaqun-qun	14, 19			aqunqun	xqunqun	\uc0\u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
aarragh-	6if4-	dress in fancy clothes		aarraghtuq \'91he dressed up\'92; aarraghaa \'91he dressed her up\'92 ;  Elngaatall siivanlleq tamaana 
\f2\i aarraatesluku.
\f0\i0  \'91They brought the elder(s) there all 
\f2\i dressed up.\'92
\f0\i0  (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:210); Aarraatkaq igaqraghllagmeng tawaten pinighrakegtepiglluku ulimalluteng. \'91everyone got all dressed up in 
\f2\i clothing
\f0\i0  which they made as 
\f2\i fancy
\f0\i0  as possible.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:86)													to dress in fancy clothes		< aate-ragh-				arragh-	xrragh-	\uc0\u257 \u1096 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aas-	6c-			
\f2\i dimensional root;
\f0\i0  > aastu-, aaskestaaghhaq																			as-	xs-	\uc0\u257 \u1089 -\
Aasa	^c9	Singikpak Pt. site east of Southwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Singikpak Pt. site east of Southwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.						asa	xsa	\uc0\u1040 \u772 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \
Aasaq	^cf2	former village site west of Cape Chukotskii in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village site west of Cape Chukotskii in Chukotka						Asaq	Xsaq	\uc0\u1040 \u772 \u1089 \u1072 \u1179 \
aasi	6cb	six (the number ~ in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)		
\f2\i the entire jingle is:
\f0\i0  aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'	counting jingle (the number \'91six\'92 in a ~ or finger naming jingle for children)	jingle (the number \'91six\'92 in a counting or finger naming ~ for children)											the number six (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)						asi	xsi	\uc0\u257 \u1089 \u1080 \
aaskestaaghhaq	6crscn65f2	narrow thing		
\f2\i Aaskestaaghhaanghani
\f0\i0  kiyang malghugneghet piiqiit, \'85 \'91Whenever it [the sea ice] 
\f2\i did not extend far
\f0\i0  out they always made two [boat paths], \'85\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:134)	extend (something that does not ~ far)												narrow thing; something that does not extend far		< aas-kestaaghaq				askestaghhaq	xskestxghhaq	\uc0\u257 \u1089 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
aasliigh-	6ck]74-	patch a skin boat		aasliightuq \'91he patched a boat\'92; aasliighaa \'91he patched it\'92 /									check for a word for \'91patch\'92 or \'91hole\'92 contained in this -- cf. aasliq \'91soup of greens and seal blood\'92 -- could the seal blood have anything to do with the patch? (unlikely, but who knows)				to patch a skin boat						asligh-	xslxgh-	\uc0\u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
aasliq	6ck]b2	soup of greens and seal blood			blood soup												soup of greens and seal blood						asliq	xsliq	\uc0\u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
Aasliq	^ck]b2	former village on east shore of Provideniia Bay; Plover Bay in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village on east shore of Provideniia Bay; Plover Bay in Chukotka						Asliq	Xsliq	\uc0\u1040 \u772 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
aasliquutaq	6ck]b28nf2	grease stain in the entrance opening of a winter house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 grease stain in the entrance opening of a winter house				CK Rub 97		asliqutaq	xsliqxtaq	\uc0\u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aastu-	6cne-	wide (be ~)		aastuuq \'91it is wide, extends far; 
\f2\i Aastughllagyalghii
\f0\i0 , kilgaaquteghllagaqelghiit, kiyang whanikumi. \'91It was 
\f2\i extended farther
\f0\i0 , as far as long distance runners were concerned, then than now.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:20); Aamta tuvalgunghani tawaten ataasiinaat kenilghet seggaqiit, qayughllak ilangakun tuvaq 
\f2\i aastaaqelghii
\f0\i0 . \'91And, whenever it had shore ice like that they made but one boat path, because the shore ice 
\f2\i extended a long way
\f0\i0  out.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:134)	extend far								strange gloss! (the -er part)				to be wide; to extend far		< aas-tu-				astu-	xstu-	\uc0\u257 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 -\
aataararay	6n6hfhfq	yuck!		
\f2\i particle; expression of disgust or fright									
\f0\i0 attested by V. Tepegkaq; (in Chukchi, this means \'91to call on the dogs to go fast while dog sledding\'92 from Tanko)				yuck!		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 98		atararay	xtxraray	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u257 \u1088 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1253 \
aatak	6nfr	do it anyway		
\f2\i particle; used to boost morale;
\f0\i0  Seghleghunaqukut, yulgutmun kaatngwaaghluta tusaqunneghitem seghletun pinaqukut, 
\f2\i aatak
\f0\i0  qitevunnaqigu! \'91Things are going poorly for us, and now that we have come across a fellow human, because we can\'92t understand each other we have a problem; 
\f2\i give it a try
\f0\i0 , speak to him in the other language!\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:124); 
\f2\i Aatak
\f0\i0  naghuyaqellaankuk meteghlluglliqellaankuk piiqagka. \'91(I\'92ll) 
\f2\i give at a try,
\f0\i0   I am trying to talk to the seagull and the raven.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 109)	give it a try	let's											do it anyway; give it a try; let's			19		aatakqun, aataqun	atak	xtak	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \
aatakqun	6nfr2ey	do it anyway		
\f2\i particle, used to boost morale
\f0\i0 ; = aataqun	give it a try	let's											do it anyway; give it a try; let's		from Chukchi \'91atawqun \'91just\'92	19			atakqun	xtakqun	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
aataqun	6nf2ey	do it anyway		
\f2\i particle; used to boost morale;
\f0\i0   = aatakqun	give it a try	let's							is this actually aatakqun or is it a variant?				do it anyway; give it a try; let's		from Chukchi \'91atawqun \'91just\'92	19			ataqun	xtaqun	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
aatati	6nfnb	one (the number ~ in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 ataasiq
\f2\i ; the entire jingle is:
\f0\i0  aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'	counting jingle (the number \'91one\'92 in a ~ or finger naming for children)	jingle (the number \'91one\'92 in a counting or finger naming ~ for children)											the number \'91one\'92 (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)						atati	xtati	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1080 \
aatawleginaq	6nf1ksubyf2	for nothing		
\f2\i particle
\f0\i0 ; aatawleginaq mughusimaaq, sakengaghsimangituq \'91he went hunting for nothing, he didn\'92t get anything\'92; unangataghalluku tagilghaaten aatawleginaq  neghsaghhnaanghituten, ayveghaghnaanghituten \'91come early in the morning, otherwise you won\'92t get seals or walrus\'92	after all	because											for nothing; after all; because			19	CK Rub 99		atawleginaq	xtawleginaq	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
aate-	6ns-	put on (clothes)		aatuq \'91it put something on\'92; aataa \'91he put it on\'92 / aalluku \'91after putting it on\'92; aalleqaa \'91he will put it on\'92; aannaqaa \'91he is going to put it on\'92; aatkaagaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aaskaagaa \'91he has put it on\'92; aasuwaaghaa \'91he feels like wearing it\'92; 	dress (get dressed)												to put on (clothes); to dress		PE at0-			aarragh-, aatkaq	ate-	xte-	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aateghngalghii	6ns43fk47	loaded thing		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); questioned	
\f0\i0 put on (thing ~)								check, seems wrong; what is the apparent base aategh- here?... perhaps this was supposed to have been iteghngalghii??? -CK				loaded; put on	pfhz;tyysq. dltnsq	< aate-?-nga-lghii		Rub. 104		ateghngalghi	xteghngalghx	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
aatghute-	6n5ens-	go out hunting on foot on the ice		sikuk kaanneghegkeni yuget aatghutaqelghiit \'91men go out hunting (on foot) once the ocean ice arrives\'92													to go out hunting on foot on the ice						atghute-	xtghute-	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aatkaq	6nrf2	article of clothing			garment												article of clothing; garment		< aate-kaq				atkaq	xtkaq	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
aatneq	6ny]s2	slope near the beach			land extending out into the water								note that it\'92s not *ateghneq which is what the derivation above should yield				slope near the beach; small portion of land extending out into the water		< ategh-neq\super 2  \nosupersub (?)				atneq	xtneq	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aatqaghtagh-	6n2f5n\'834-	go out (suddenly and quickly ~)											check; what is the connection with aatqaghte- \'91to slip or jerk when working with something by hand\'92?; This word is for getting out of the main living area, it\'92s the same as samavek. Like in the example Rub gives: aghnaq aatqaghtamaaq nateghmun aanesnaluku iitqaghtalghii qikmiq \'91the lady went out to the outer part of the house to let the dog out  which was going in and out of the house\'92				to suddenly and quickly go out (as from room)	dscrfrbdfnm bp gjvtotybz.cjcrfrbdfnm c xtuj-k>	< aatqaghte-?-		Rub. 101		atqaghtagh-	xtqaghtagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u769 \u1271 -\
aatqaghte-	6n2f5ns-	slip when working with something by hand		aatqaghtuq \'91he or it jerked\'92; aatqaghtaa \'91he jerked it\'92/ tumeneng aatqaghtuq \'91he ran off the road\'92; terelleghmeng piineqegkani aatqaghtaa \'91he painted off the marked line\'92	jerk when working with something by hand	run off the road								deviate from the desired path			to slip or jerk when working with something by hand; to run off the road; to deviate from the desired path						atqaghte-	xtqaghte-	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aatwarae	6n1fhfs	hot water		= haatwara													hot water		from English \'91hot water\'92	SLI			atwarae	xtwarae	\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1265 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1099 \
aavgaghte-	6duf5ns-	split open suddenly			injured severely on the surface of one\'92s body												to split open suddenly; to get injured severely on the surface of one\'92s body	hfp,bdfncz lj rhjdb	< aveg-aghte-		CK V & E 65; CK		avgaghte-	xvgaghte-	\uc0\u257 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aavgugh-	6due4-	cut up thoroughly															to cut up thoroughly		< aveg-ugh-				avgugh-	xvgugh-	\uc0\u257 \u1074 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
aavneq	6dys2	half			half dollar												half; half dollar		< aveg-neq\super 1				\nosupersub avneq	xvneq	\uc0\u257 \u1074 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aavnguq	6d3e2	burl															burl		PY av&uq				avnguq	xvnguq	\uc0\u257 \u1074 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
aavngutae	6d3enfs	sealskin pants		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 aavngutek 
\f2\i for one pair of pants	
\f0\i0 pants, sealskin												sealskin pants		< aveg-?-(u)n				avngutae	xvngutae	\uc0\u257 \u1074 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \
aaw-	61-	bleed		
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  aakw \'91blood\'92	menstruate												to bleed; to menstruate		PE a9u!				aw-	xw-	\uc0\u257 \u1265 -\
aawaallu	616k]/	so soon!		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  = aawallu	already												so soon!; already			19			awallu	xwxllu	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
aawallu	61fk]/	so soon!		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 = aawaallu	already												so soon!; already			19			awallu	xwallu	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
aawhkagh-	61]rf4-	spring season (for ~ to come)		aawhkaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aawhkaghaa \'91spring has come\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 awa(ni)													for spring to come						awhkagh-	xwhkagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aawhkaghhaaneng	61]rf56ys3	for ages (in the past)		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 for quite a while now												for ages (in the past); for quite a while now		< aawhkagh-?-ghhaq-
\f2\i abl.-mod.	
\f0\i0 19			awhkaghhaneng	xwhkaghhxneng	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \
aawhkaghniimna	61[rf4y7vyf	previous place		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 former one								check -- seems like some kind of compound of aawkagh- (under aw-) meaning \'91ago\'92, and iimna \'91the aforementioned one\'92				previous place; former one	ght;ybq.ght;ytt vtcnj	
\f2\i a compound word from 
\f0\i0 aawkaghni 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  iimna		Rub. 108		awhkaghnimna	xwhkaghnxmna	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
aawhkaghniq*	61]rf4yb2	thing of a while ago		= aawhkaghtaq	ago (thing of a while ~)												hing of a while ago		< aawhkagh-?				awhkaghniq*	xwhkaghniq*	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \
aawhkaghtaq	61]rf5nf2	thing of a while ago		= aawhkaghniq*	ago (thing of a while ~)												thing of a while ago		< aawhkagh-taq\super 2				\nosupersub awhkaghtaq	xwhkaghtaq	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aawhkan	61]rfy	while ago (during the same season)		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 week ago	month ago								ago (a while ~, a week ~, a month ~)			a while ago (during the same season); a week ago; a month ago		< aawhkagh-? (?)	19			awhkan	xwhkan	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \
aawhkaqun	61]rf2ey	springtime (in the ~)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 in the springtime		< aawhkagh-
\f2\i vialis	
\f0\i0 19			awhkaqun	xwhkaqun	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
aawhkayaghaq	61]rfz4f2	while (a ~ back)		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 some time ago	ago (some time ~)											some time ago; a while back		< aawhkagh-yaghagh-	19			awhkayaghaq	xwhkayaghaq	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
aawhtaq	61[nf2	jade															jade				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 142		awhtaq	xwhtaq	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aawhtu-	61]ne-	bloody (be ~)		aawhtuuq \'91it is bloody\'92 / aawhtuqaq \'91a bloody thing\'92													to be bloody		< aakw-tu-				awhtu-	xwhtu-	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 -\
aawhtuqe-	61]ne2s-	bleed		aawhtuquq \'91it is bleeding\'92 /													to bleed		< aakw-?-				awhtuqe-	xwhtuqe-	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aawiite-	617ns-	lose blood			blood (lose ~)												to lose blood		< aakw-(ng)i:ghute-				awite-	xwxte-	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aawite-	61bns-	bloodless (be ~)		aawituq \'91it is bloodless \'91; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  aangwunani \'91being without blood\'92 (
\f2\i irregular variant of 
\f0\i0 aawinaan 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aawunaan)													to be bloodless		< aakw-(ng)ite-				awite-	xwite-	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aawyaq	61z2	blood clot			clot (blood ~)												blood clot		PE a9u!ya3 (under PE a9u!); < aakw-?				awyaq	xwyaq	\uc0\u257 \u1265 \u1103 \u1179 \
aaygu	6que	arrow											Chukchi source? or what; cf. NSY angku \'91arrow\'92				arrow		possibly from Chukchi ?	x			aygu	xygu	\uc0\u257 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \
aayguk	6quer	stars seen at dawn, Altair and Tarared in the constellation of the Eagle			Altair and Tarared in the constellation of the Eagle												pair of stars seen at dawn, Altair and Tarared in the constellation of the Eagle		PE aay$uuk 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  < aaygu
\f2\i -dual 				
\f0\i0 ayguk	xyguk	\uc0\u257 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1082 \
aayiiq tanem	6q72 nfysv	preliminary incantation		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); literally
\f0\i0 , \'91aayiiq, once again\'92 (aayiiq 
\f2\i is a name of a certain spirit, a 
\f0\i0 tughneghaq)	incantation, preliminary												preliminary incantation; call to a certain spirit				CK Rub 37 CK	xxxt	ayiq tanem	xyxq tanem	\uc0\u257 \u1253 \u1251 \u1179  \u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \
aaykagh-	6qrf4-	gamble		aaykaghtuq \'91he is gambling\'92; y
\f2\i  preceding 
\f0\i0 k
\f2\i  questioned									
\f0\i0 check to see if there really is y here next to the stop k				to gamble						aykagh-	xykagh-	\uc0\u257 \u1253 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aaykaq	6qrf2	poker or similar card game		y
\f2\i  preceding 
\f0\i0 k
\f2\i  is unusual	
\f0\i0 gambling	card game (poker or the like)											poker or similar card game; gambling						aykaq	xykaq	\uc0\u257 \u1253 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
afkuyaq	farez2	cause of something (especially a problem)		ullghitagma afkuyaa naalkaghtaqa \'91I found the cause of the problem with my wheeled/tracked vehicle\'92; Naghullgaqluki, pakin'gumakanga nagun iqelqwakun itegaakun, taawa taana tuqusiqaa, pakinellgha qazigyaghaam. Aatgha Anaqsi, Sikneghnii. 
\f2\i Afkuyaghhaan
\f0\i0 . \'91While he was harpooning them, it scratched him somewhere on his little toe, and that\'92s what killed him, the scratch of a seal. \'85 That was 
\f2\i all it took
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:22)													cause of something (especially a problem)						afkuyaq	afkuyaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1082 \u1091 \u1103 \u1179 \
aflaaghaghte-	fak]95ns-	interrupt															to interrupt		< aflaaq-aghte- (?)				aflaghaghte-	aflxghaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aflaaq	fak]92	between (thing ~ two others)			middle one												thing between two others; middle one		< aflu-?			> aflaaghaghte-	aflaq	aflxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
aflenga-	fak]s3f-	thrifty (be ~)		aflengaaq \'91he is thrifty\'92, \'91he takes care of his things\'92 /	care (take good ~ of one\'92s things\'92												to be thrifty; to take good care of one\'92s things					> aflengake-, aflenganeq	aflenga-	aflenga-	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 -\
aflengake-	fak]s3frs-	take care of (valued possession or person)		aflengakaa \'91he is taking care of it\'92 / Qikmiqa ataasiq tuunluku maalghuk 
\f2\i aflengakagka
\f0\i0 .\'92 I gave away one of my dogs and 
\f2\i kept
\f0\i0  two.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 8)	keep												to take care of (valued possession or person); to keep		< aflenga-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				aflengake-	aflengake-	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
aflenganeq	fak]s3fys2	thrifty person		aflenganghuuq \'91he\'92s a person who takes good care of what he has\'92	care (one who takes good ~ of what he has)												thrifty person; one who takes good care of what he has		< aflenga-neq\super ?				\nosupersub aflenganeq	aflenganeq	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aflu	fak]/	span from one thing to another (as from one hour to the next)		Estamat 
\f2\i aflut
\f0\i0  piyugutkanka. \'91I walked for four 
\f2\i hours
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 132)	between (thing ~ two others)												the span from one thing to another (as from one hour to the next); thing between two others (as a child born between two others)					> aflaaq	aflu	aflu	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
aflute-	fak]/ns-	feel sorry for		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 sympathize with												to feel sorry for; to sympathize with				CK Rub 110		aflute-	aflute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1090 \u1099 -\
afsengaghpak	facs3f5gfr	muskrat		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 beaver	
\f2\i Ondata zibethicus								Castor canadensis			
\f0\i0 muskrat (Ondata zibethicus); beaver (Castor canadensis)		< afsengaq-ghpak				afsengaghpak	afsengaghpak	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
afsengaghqe-	facs3f52s-	squeak, like a mouse		afsengaghquq \'91there\'92s a squeaking, mouse sound\'92													for there to be the squeaking sound of a mouse		< afsengaq-?-		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 157		afsengaghqe-	afsengaghqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
afsengaq*	facs3f2	vole			\'93mouse\'94 (vole)	mucus (
\f2\i slang
\f0\i0  for lump of dried nasal ~)								
\f2\i Microtus sp.			
\f0\i0 vole 
\f2\i (Microtus sp. )
\f0\i0 ; 
\f2\i locally
\f0\i0  mouse; 
\f2\i also slang for
\f0\i0  lump of dried nasal mucus		PE av0l&a3			> aflengaghpak	afsengaq*	afsengaq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \
afta-	fanf-	cut up game		aftaaq \'91he butchered an animal\'92; aftaa \'91he butchered it\'92 /	butcher game	surgery (have ~)											to cut up game; to butcher game; to have surgery (additional Chukotkan meaning)		< afte-?-				afta-	afta-	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1090 \u1072 -\
afte-	fans-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > afta-, aafte-; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  avek																			afte-	afte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aga	fuf	away		
\f2\i particle; this is the interjectional form of the demo. adverb 
\f0\i0 aga(ni) from 
\f2\i demo. pronoun
\f0\i0  aagna
\f2\i (q.v.); 
\f0\i0 Amaaghllak 
\f2\i aga
\f0\i0  estunaquq. \'91
\f2\i There
\f0\i0  he goes, the wolf is about to slide.\'92  (AYUM. UNGIP. I:7)	gone	there											away; gone; there		PE dem. ag-				aga	aga	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \
agaavik	fu6dbr	double hook used to fasten caught walrus to side of boat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 double hook used to fasten caught walrus to side of boat				CK Rub 20		agavik	agxvik	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u257 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
agagh-	fuf4-	hanging		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  agaghtuq \'91it got hung, snagged\'92; agaghtaa \'91he hung it up\'92; agaghngaaq \'91it is hanging\'92; agaghfik \'91place to hang things\'92													hanging		PE a!(!)a(3)-			> agaghfikutaq, agaqraq	agagh-	agagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
agaghfikutaq	fuf5abrenf2	hanger (clothes ~)			clothespin	peg for hanging things								hook for hanging things			clothes hanger; clothespin; peg for hanging things; hook for hanging things		< agagh-te\super 1\nosupersub -vik-qutaq				agaghfikutaq	agaghfikutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
agaghtiiraagh-	fuf5n7h64-	hang		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 hanging (be ~)												to hang; to be hanging	dbctnm	< agagh-?- 		Rub. 21		agaghtiragh-	agaghtxrxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1251 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
agaghtusiq	fuf5necb2	hanger (clothes ~)			clothespin	peg for hanging things								hook for hanging things			clothes hanger; clothespin; peg for hanging things; hook for hanging things		< agagh-te\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				agaghtusiq	agaghtusiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
agaghugllaka	fuf4e[k]zrf	oh, what a pity!		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 pity (oh, what a ~!)												oh, what a pity!						agaghugllaka	agaghugllaka	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \
agalghu-	fufk4e-	stagger		agalghuuq \'91he staggered\'92 / agalghwaaghtuq \'91he keeps staggering as he walks\'92													to stagger						agalghu-	agalghu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 -\
agalqutaq	fufk]2enf2	peg for hanging things			hook for hanging things												peg for hanging things; hook for hanging things		< agagh-qutaq				agalqutaq	agalqutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
agam	fufv	okay		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle	
\f0\i0 enough (that\'92s ~)								check whether used on SLI				okay, that\'92s enough	ye. ye ljdjkmyj			Rub. 21		agam	agam	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1084 \
agangsitagh-	fuf3cbnf4-	stay away		agangsitaghtuq \'91he, or it, it staying away\'92 / kayut saamkut agangsitaghtat nalleq? \'91why are the fish down there staying away?\'92													to stay away				VK\'92s dict. revs.		agangsitagh-	agangsitagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1187 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
agaqraq	fuf2if2	peg for hanging things			hook for hanging things												peg for hanging things; hook for hanging things		< agagh-qraq				agaqraq	agaqraq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1179 \
agaten	fufnsy	must be the case		
\f2\i particle (perhaps two different particles);  
\f0\i0 agaten aghuliighaqluni igleghtaquq \'91he must be stopping once in a while as he travels\'92; qeghalguteyeng ataasiq agaten ayuqaqaa \'91they aren\'92t very enthusiastic about one of their fellow workers\'92; Ataasit 
\f2\i agaten
\f0\i0  amaallgaat esghaqaghaqanka, pamakaghtat. \'91I\'92d see an occasional wolfskin [ruff] which 
\f2\i must have
\f0\i0  come from Siberia.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:114)	unenthusiastic												must be the case; unenthusiastic		from Chukchi ?	x	VK\'92s dict. revs.		agaten	agaten	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \
agatu	fufne	kelp type			
\f2\i Agarum cribrosum												
\f0\i0 type of kelp
\f2\i  (Agarum cribrosum)				
\f0\i0 Aynganga\'92s article in \'93Beringia\'94; SLI Cur. Res. Man. 61		agatu	agatu	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \
agenriqe-	fusyhb2s-	think carefully about something		agenriquq \'91he thought carefully\'92; agenriqaqulluku pegnem ayveq qaakaghput \'91after we thought carefully about it we finally pulled the walrus out\'92													to think carefully about something				VK\'92s dict. revs.		agenriqe-	agenriqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1085 \u1088 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
agepsugh- 	fusgc/4-	smoky (be ~)		agepsughtuq \'91it is smoky\'92 / agepsughtaa \'91it is getting smoky\'92													to be smoky						agepsugh- 	agepsugh- 	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\
agepsuq	fusgc/2	smoke		agepsughtuuq \'91there's a lot of smoke\'92; agepsughtaaghtuq \'91it has smoke coming out of it\'92	steam												smoke; steam		PE apyu3				agepsuq	agepsuq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \
agesngughte-	fusc3]e5ns-	kill instantly		agesngughtaa \'91he killed it instantly\'92/ ayveq agesngughlluku tuqutaa \'91he killed the walrus instantly (by hitting it on the bridge of the nose)\'92	kill by hitting on bridge of nose	knock out							check; Rub. gives agesngughtaqaa, but I can\'92t understand the Russian gloss				to kill instantly (especally by hitting on bridge of nose); to knock out (?)				A&W 3, Rub. 26, CK V & E 145		agesngughte-	agesngughte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
agesta	fuscnf	sh-sh		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle	
\f0\i0 hush!												sh-sh; hush!				CK Rub 26		agesta	agesta	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
agghi	fu4b	conference															conference						agghi	agghi	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1271 \u1080 \
agghi-	fu4b-	confer		agghiiq \'91he decided\'92/ agghiit \'91they are conferring, deciding on something\'92; agghitkaa \'91he decided concerning it, figured it out\'92; agghiiq igleghhnaluni \'91he decided to go\'92	decide												to confer; to decide					> agghista	agghi-	agghi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1271 \u1080 -\
agghista	fu4bcnf	commander															commander		< agghi-(s)ta				agghista	agghista	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1271 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
agghiyugniqe-	fu4b/uyb2s-	spoiled (be ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  agghi; mekelghiighhaq agghiyugniquq ghhuuteghngaatni wata an\'92gighnaluni \'91the little boy tried to have his way and stay outdoors even though it was cold\'92	obstinate (be ~)												to be spoiled; to be obstinate						agghiyugniqe-	agghiyugniqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1271 \u1080 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
agha	f4f	amulet			medicine	aspirin											amulet; medicine; aspirin		PE a39a			> aghaligh-, aghallegtaq, aghavraq ?	agha	agha	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \
aghaligh-	f4fkb4-	treat with medicine		aghalightuq \'91he took medicine or put on an amulet\'92; aghalighaa \'91he gave her medicine or put an amulet on her\'92/	medicate	put on an amulet											to treat with medicine; to medicate; to put on an amulet		< agha-ligh-				aghaligh-	aghaligh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
aghallegtaq	f4fk]s[nf2	doctor															doctor		< agha-llek-?				aghallegtaq	aghallegtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghanghuuraq	f4fy48hf2	amulet attached on to belt or clothing		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 medicinal plant sewn on to animal skin and attached to one\'92s belt												amulet attached on to belt or clothing;  medicinal plant sewn on to animal skin and attached to one\'92s belt		< agha-?		CK Rub 26		aghanghuraq	aghanghxraq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1263 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghavaghllak	f4fdf5k]zr	clear weather															clear weather				SLI Cur. Man. 21		aghavaghllak	aghavaghllak	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
aghavraq	f4fdhf2	poppy (Alaska ~)			
\f2\i Papaver alaskanum												
\f0\i0 Alaska poppy 
\f2\i (Papaver alaskanum)		
\f0\i0 < agha-?				aghavraq	aghavraq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghelqute-	f4sk]2ens-	move a little (of something heavy and/or tight)		aghelqutuq \'91it moved a little, it budged\'92; aghelqutaa \'91he moved it a little, he budged it\'92/	budge												to move a little (of something heavy and/or tight); to budge						aghelqute-	aghelqute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghenqigneq	f4sy2buys2	right-hand side		aghenqigneghmun \'91to the right\'92													right-hand side		PE a30nqi!-		CK V & E 118, CK (terminalis)		aghenqigneq	aghenqigneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1099 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghevestaaghaq*	f4sdscn65f2	soft thing		qenu meghmelnguq aghevestaaghhaaguq \'91the new ice in the ocean is soft\'92	person who is willed and easily influenced												soft thing; person who is weak-willed and easily influenced		< aghevestaaq-(gh)aq				aghevestaghaq*	aghevestxghaq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghevestaaq	f4sdscn62	soft thing		anigu qaga aghevestaapiguuq ifkanghhaaluni \'91the newly fallen snow out there is very soft\'92; aghevestaaq ugharra piyullginnapigtuq \'91the soft marsh is hard to walk on\'92	person who is weak-willed and easily influenced												soft thing; person who is weak-willed and easily influenced				A&W 3	aghevestaaghhaq*	aghevestaq	aghevestxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
aghhmagte-	f5v]f[ns-	take all		aghhmagtaa \'91he took or used all of it\'92 /	use all	all (take or use ~)											to take all; to use all		PY a3(ca3)ma!- (under PE a3ca3-)				aghhmagte-	aghhmagte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghhmeghneq	f5v]s4ys2	firmness		aghhmeghneqegtaq \'91a sturdy skin or piece of clothing\'92	sturdiness												firmness; sturdiness						aghhmeghneq	aghhmeghneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1084 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghhunneghagu	f5ey]s4fue	every day		
\f2\i particle (actually inflected form); literally,
\f0\i0  \'91whenever day comes upon it\'92;  = eghhunneghagu									check, but looks okay, explained as: unaaminghagu, which VK translates as \'91when it is the next day\'92				every day		< aghte-(u)te-
\f2\i contemporative		
\f0\i0 A&W 19		aghhunneghagu	aghhunneghagu	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1091 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \

\fs20 aghhutanga tamaghhaan	
\fs24 f5enf3f nfvf[6y	every day		
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91its becoming day, every one\'92; 
\f2\i Aghhutanga tamaghhaan 
\f0\i0 takwaaqiit. \'91
\f2\i Every day
\f0\i0  they would check it.\'92 (PIYAA. 14)													every day		< aghte-(u)te-
\f2\i possessed absolutive 
\f0\i0 +
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 tamaghhagh
\f2\i -quantifier/qualifier			
\f0\i0 xxxt	aghhutanga tamaghhan	aghhutanga tamaghhxn	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072  \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1093 \u257 \u1085 \
aghhutkun	f5enrey	dawn (at ~)		
\f2\i adverbial particle;
\f0\i0  aghhutkun esla naavuq \'91the weather got bad at dawn\'92													at dawn		< aghte-(u)n-
\f2\i vialis		
\f0\i0 VK		aghhutkun	aghhutkun	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
aghi-	f4b-	wet (be ~)		aghiiq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aghii \'91it got wet\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 aghilluk													to be wet		PE a3i(t)-			> aghinaq, aghipa, aghisigh-, aghitqe-	aghi-	aghi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 -\
aghiknaq	f4bry]f2	sculpin, \'93prickly\'94		
\f2\i exact species undetermined	
\f0\i0 \'93prickly\'94 sculpin												\'93prickly\'94 sculpin				SLI Cur. Man. 53		aghiknaq	aghiknaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghilluk	f4bk]/r	skin mitten		
\f2\i Chukotkan; cf. 
\f0\i0 aghi-	mitten (skin ~)	glove											skin mitten; glove		PY-S a3in (under PE a3i(t)-)				aghilluk	aghilluk	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
aghinaq	f4byf2	moisture outdoors			wet weather												moisture outdoors; wet weather		< aghi-naq; PE a3ina3- (under PE a3i(t)-)				aghinaq	aghinaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghinghwaaq	f4by4162	bag, small, of sealskin holding certain articles used to try to ensure good whale hunting															small bag of sealskin holding certain articles used to try to ensure good whale hunting		PE a33i(t)na3				aghinghwaq	aghinghwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
aghinqagh-	f4by2f4-	wet (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 to wet	yfvfxbdfn			CK V & E 41		aghinqagh-	aghinqagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aghipa	f4bgf	wetness			moisture												wetness; moisture		PE a3ipa-; < aghi-?-			> aghipate-, aghipsaate-	aghipa	aghipa	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \
aghipate-	f4bgfns-	wet (be ~)		aghipatuq \'91it is wet\'92, \'91it is raw\'92 /	raw (be ~)												to be wet; to be raw		 < aghipa-(u)te-				aghipate-	aghipate-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghipsaate-	f4bgc9ns-	wet (be partly ~)		aghipsaalnguq \'91partially wet or raw thing\'92	raw (be partially ~)												to be partly wet; to be partially raw		< aghipa-?-				aghipsate-	aghipsxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1087 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghisigh-	f4bcb4-	soak		aghisightuq \'91it is being soaked or he is letting himself get wet\'92; aghisighaa \'91he is soaking it\'92 /													to soak		< aghi-sigh-				aghisigh-	aghisigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
aghitqe-	f4bn2s-	wet (get very ~)		aghitquq \'91he or it got very wet\'92; aghitqaa \'91he got it very wet\'92 /													to get very wet		< aghi-?-				aghitqe-	aghitqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aghiva-	f4bdf-	quarrel (of women)		aghivaaq \'91she is quarreling with someone, bawling out someone\'92; aghivaa \'91she is quarreling with her\'92 / aghivatuk \'91they (two women) are quarreling\'92	bawl out (by women)												to quarrel (of women); to bawl out (by women)		PE a3iva-				aghiva-	aghiva-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 -\
aghliigh-	f4k74-	overwhelmed		
\f2\i emotional root; 
\f0\i0 aghliighyugtuq \'91he feels overwhelmed by the tasks facing him\'92; aghliighyukaa \'91he feels overwhelmed by it\'92; aghliighnaghtuq \'91it is overwhelming\'92													overwhelmed		PE a3li(C)-				aghligh-	aghlxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
aghmig-	f4vbu-	wash one's face		aghmigtuq \'91he washed his (own) face\'92; aghmigaa \'91he washed his (another's) face\'92 /													to wash one's face		PE 03mi!-			> aghmigusiq, aghmigusik	aghmig-	aghmig-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
aghmigusiq	f4vbuecb2	washcloth		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 aghmigusik
\f2\i , for one washbasin	
\f0\i0 soap (face ~)	washbasin											washcloth; face soap; washbasin		< aghmig-(u)siq				aghmigusiq	aghmigusiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
aghnaaghte-	f4y65ns-	menses (have one\'92s first ~)															to have one's first menses		< aghnaq-(ng)ughte-				aghnaghte-	aghnxghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghnaaneq	f4y6ys2	female bird, fish, or seal or other animal			female (state of being ~)												female bird, fish, or seal or other animal; state of being female		< aghnaq-(ng)u-neq\super 2				\nosupersub aghnaneq	aghnxneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghnaasiq	f4y6cb2	effeminate man		Kiyaghneghem Ataneghpagullghani nekaghqiitut: \'85 allaniighet, 
\f2\i aghnaasit
\f0\i0 , \'85 \'91In God\'92s Kingdom there is no room for: \'85 adulterers, 
\f2\i the
\f0\i0  
\f2\i effeminate
\f0\i0  , \'85\'92 (1 Corinthians 6.9)	homosexual male												effeminate man; homosexual male		< aghnaq-(ng)u-(u)siq				aghnasiq	aghnxsiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
aghnagan	f4yfufy	hurry up		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  aghnagan uyuq emta \'91hurry up you, knowing how you are\'92													hurry up		from Chukchi ?	x			aghnagan	aghnagan	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1085 \
aghnagh-	f4yf4-	wear a dress		aghnaghluni \'91wearing a dress\'92; 
\f2\i direct verbalization of 
\f0\i0 aghnaq \'91woman\'92	dress (wear a ~)												to wear a dress		PE a3na3				aghnagh-	aghnagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Aghnaghaak	F4yf46r	Aghnak River on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Aghnak River on St. Lawrence Is.		< aghnaghaq-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 Aghnaghak	Aghnaghxk	\uc0\u1040 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1082 \
aghnaghaghhaq*	f4yf4f5f2	little girl			girl, little												little girl	ltdjxrf	< aghnaghaq-ghhaq		CK V & E 74; CK		aghnaghaghhaq*	aghnaghaghhaq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
Aghnaghaghyaget	F4yf4f4mzusn	Pleides constellation		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91group of girls\'92													Pleides constellation		< aghnaghaq-yaga\super e\nosupersub -
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Aghnaghaghyaget	Aghnaghaghyaget	\uc0\u1040 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \
aghnaghaq*	f4yf4f2	girl															girl		PY a3na3aq (under PE a3na3); < aghnaq-ghaq				aghnaghaq*	aghnaghaq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghnaghniite-	f4yf4ybns-	ugly (be ~ (of a girl))															to be ugly (a girl)	ytrhfcbdfz (;tyobyf. ltdeirf)	< aghnaq-?-		CK V & E 128, Rub 31 CK		aghnaghnite-	aghnaghnxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghnaghpallaghte-	f4yf5gfk]z5ns-	woman (become an older ~)															to become an older woman		< aghnaq-?-			> aghnaghpallaghtekaq	aghnaghpallaghte-	aghnaghpallaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghnaghpallaghtekaq	f4yf5gfk]z5nsrf2	woman, older															older woman		< aghnaghpallaghte-(g)kaq				aghnaghpallaghtekaq	aghnaghpallaghtekaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghnaghqaq	f4yf52f2	wife-to-be			female to be included in a group	dress material											wife-to-be; female to be included in a group; dress material		< aghnaq-kaq				aghnaghqaq	aghnaghqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghnaghuq	f4yf4e2	edible seashore life resembling a mouse in appearance		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 aghnaq	Boltenia ovifera	sea creature, edible, found on beaches and resembling a mouse in appearance								\'93sea onion\'94			edible seashore life resembling a mouse in appearance (
\f2\i Boltenia ovifera); \'93
\f0\i0 sea onion\'94		PY a3na3uq				aghnaghuq	aghnaghuq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 \
aghnalgun	f4yfkuey	cousin (parallel ~ on mother's side)															mother's sister's child; parallel cousin on mother's side		PY a3nal!un (under PE a3na3); < aghnaq-lgun				aghnalgun	aghnalgun	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
aghnalqwaaq	f4yfk]2162	woman, old			old woman												old woman		PE a3nalqu(C)a3 (under PE a3na3); < aghnaq-?-			aghnalqwaavregaq	aghnalqwaq	aghnalqwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
aghnalqwaavregaq	f4yfk]216dhsuf2	old senile woman		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 senile old woman												old senile woman	lhz[kfz cnfhe[f	< aghnalqwaaq-vlaaq		CK V & E 74		aghnalqwavregaq	aghnalqwxvregaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1074 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghnangllagh-	f4yf3k]z4-	make a dress		Aghnaghaat igaghvigmi aghnangllaatut. \'91The girls made dresses in school.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 11); Yuuk 
\f2\i aghnangllaghiiq
\f0\i0  ighneghminun. \'91The man 
\f2\i asked that a certain girl should be the wife
\f0\i0  for his son.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 11)	ask to marry (of an older man asking a woman on behalf of a younger man)												to make a dress; to ask to marry (of an older man asking a woman on behalf of a younger man)		< aghnaq-ngllagh-				aghnangllagh-	aghnangllagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
aghnapari	f4yfgfhb	older girl		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 young woman												older girl; young woman		< aghnaq-?		CK Rub 32		aghnapari	aghnapari	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1088 \u1080 \
aghnapesqighte-	f4yfgsc2b5ns-	sit (in woman\'92s traditional style)		
\f2\i sitting by bending one leg resting it on the floor while the other leg is also bent but upright with the foot flat on the floor; 
\f0\i0 aghnapesqighlluteng aghnat avegtughaqut neghuunneghmeggmi \'91sitting woman-style the women are cutting food at meal time\'92													to sit (in woman\'92s traditional style)		< aghnaq-?		A&W 3		aghnapesqighte-	aghnapesqighte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghnaq	f4yf2	woman			female human	dress											woman; female human; dress 
\f2\i (when used in dual)		
\f0\i0 PE a3na3			> aghnaghaq, aghnaghpallaghte-, aghnaghqaq, aghnaaghte-, aghnalgun, aghnalqwaaq, aghnaaneq, aghnangllagh-, aghnaqe-, aghnasalek, aghnaasiq	aghnaq	aghnaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghnaqe-	f4yf2s-	proud (be ~ in a way appropriate for a woman)		aghnaquq \'91she is proud\'92/													to be proud in a way appropriate for a woman		< aghnaq-?-				aghnaqe-	aghnaqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aghnaqemsighte-	f4yf2svcb5ns-	sit (in woman\'92s traditional style)		
\f2\i sitting by bending one leg resting it on the floor while the other leg is also bent but upright with the foot flat on the floor													
\f0\i0 to sit (in woman\'92s traditional style)		< aghnaq-?-		VK\'92s notes to A&W 3		aghnaqemsighte-	aghnaqemsighte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghnasalek	f4yfczksr	female walrus			walrus female	cow walrus											female walrus; cow walrus		< aghnaq-?-				aghnasalek	aghnasalek	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
aghnasiq	f4yfcb2	\'93sea cabbage\'94		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 \'93sea cabbage\'94		< aghnaq-? (?)		CK Rub 32		aghnasiq	aghnasiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
aghneghet	f4ys4sn	dawn		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 dusk	twilight											dawn; dusk; twilight		< aghneq-
\f2\i plural		
\f0\i0 CK Rub 32		aghneghet	aghneghet	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \
aghneghiinaghqun	f4ys47yf52ey	daily		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 daily		< aghneq-?-inaq-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 aghneghinaghqun	aghneghxnaghqun	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
aghneghmi	f4ys4vb	today		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 daytime (during the ~)												today; during the daytime		< aghneq-
\f2\i localis				
\f0\i0 aghneghmi	aghneghmi	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \
aghneghniimna	f4ys4y7vyf	one from earlier today															the one from earlier today		< aghneghni + iimna
\f2\i  (compound word)		
\f0\i0 CK Rub 32		aghneghnimna	aghneghnxmna	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
aghneghtaq	f4ys5nf2	one from earlier today		nagu yuuk aghneghtaq? \'91where is the man from earlier today\'92													the one from earlier today		< aghneq-taq\super 2		\nosupersub CK Rub 32 CK		aghneghtaq	aghneghtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghneghte-	f4ys5ns-	spend the day		Sivuqaaneng piiwaaluni Sivungami aghneghsimalghii \'91when he was going back home to Gambell from Northeast Cape, he spent the day at Savoonga\'92													to spend the day		< aghneq-te\super 2\nosupersub -		CK Rub 32 CK		aghneghte-	aghneghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghneghtughte-	f4ys5ne5ns-	days get longer			longer (days get ~)												for the days to get longer		< aghnegh-?-				aghneghtughte-	aghneghtughte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghneghtuumaan	f4ys5n8v6y	day (during the ~ as well)		
\f2\i essentially a particle													
\f0\i0 during the day as well	lytv b yjxm/	< aghneq-tuumagh-
\f2\i quantifier/qualifier		
\f0\i0 Rub.  32		aghneghtuman	aghneghtxmxn	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1263 \u1084 \u257 \u1085 \
aghneq	f4ys2	day		aghneqaghaq \'91earlier today\'92; Sivuliq aghneq \'91Sunday\'92; Allgha aghneq \'91Monday\'92; Pingayaa aghneq \'91Tuesday\'92; Estamaa aghneq \'91Wednesday\'92; Tallimaa aghneq \'91Thursday\'92; Aghvillgha aghneq \'91Friday\'92; Maaghraghvinlek aghneq \'91Saturday\'92; Aghnaghaq una qepghaghpenani quunpeng naghaaghllak 
\f2\i tamaghhaan aghneq. Aghneq iingunaan
\f0\i0  qepghanemni, qenwat meghnughaqunga. \'91This girl plays without working 
\f2\i every day.
\f0\i0  When I work 
\f2\i all day, 
\f0\i0 I am tired.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 68)	today								also \'91dawn\'92 as Rub. gives for the plural?				day; today
\f2\i  (as a particle)		
\f0\i0 PY 03n0q (under PY-S 030-\super 2\nosupersub ); < aghte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub aghneq	aghneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Aghneq	F4ys2	site in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka				Men. 1972, 1975		aghneq	aghneq	\uc0\u1040 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghnequn	f4ys2ey	afternoon (this ~)		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 later today	today (later ~)											this afternoon; later today		< aghneq-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 aghnequn	aghnequn	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
aghneqwaaqun	f4ys2162ey	later (a little ~ today)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 a little later today		< aghneq-(ngw/ghw/w)aaq-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 aghneqwaqun	aghneqwxqun	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
aghni-	f4yb-	stay an extra day while travelling (usually, in order to rest)		qikmini meghnaalisqelluki aghniiq \'91he stayed an extra day to let his dogs rest\'92	spend one or more days												to spend one or more days; to stay an extra day while travelling (usually, in order to rest)		< aghneq-i\super 2\nosupersub -		VK		aghni-	aghni-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 -\
aghpenghhayaaghek 	f5gsy5f94sr	bloomers (billowy)			underpants, woman\'92s, old-fashioned												billowy bloomers; woman's underpants		< aghpuneq-ghhaq-?-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 aghpenghhayaghek 	aghpenghhayxghek 	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1203 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1099 \u1082 \
aghpu-	f5ge-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > aghpugte-, aghpuuk, aghpumla, aghpuneq, aghpunghhaak																			aghpu-	aghpu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 -\
aghpugpaghlleq	f5ge[gf5k]s2	blister, small		< aghpu-?-ghpak-lleq													small blister		< aghpu-?-ghpak-lleq				aghpugpaghlleq	aghpugpaghlleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghpugte-	f5ge[ns-	rise (of dough or the like)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)
\f0\i0  	swell up								cf. aghpu- as in aghpuuk \'91foam\'92, aghpuugsaasiq \'91leavening agent\'92, aghpuneq \'91gas in stomach\'92; check length of u here; used in SLI?				to rise (of dough  or the like); to swell	gjlybvfnmcz \'f8j ntcnt\uc0\u960 	< aghpu-?-		Rub. 116 (2nd gloss: CK V & E 177)		aghpugte-	aghpugte-	\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghpumla	f5gevkz	snow, deep soft and powdery															deep, soft, powdery snow		< aghpu-?-				aghpumla	aghpumla	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \
aghpumla-	f5gevkz-	snow (go through deep soft powdery ~)		aghpumlaaq \'91he went through deep snow\'92	go through deep soft and powdery snow												to go through deep snow		< aghpu-?-				aghpumla-	aghpumla-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 -\
aghpuneq	f5geys2	gas in stomach or intestines		aghpuniqunga \'91I am now troubled by gas in my stomach or intestines\'92 													gas in stomach or intestines		< aghpu-neq\super 2				\nosupersub aghpuneq	aghpuneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghpuneqrak	f5geys2ifr	bubble		eslallugmi mesagmi allgeghumaaq uglalghii aghpuneqrak \'91a lot of bubbles  formed in the puddle during the rain\'92													bubble		< aghpuneq-krak		CK Rub 116		aghpuneqrak	aghpuneqrak	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
aghpunghhaak	f5gey56r	bloomers (billowy)			underpants, woman\'92s, old-fashioned												billowy bloomers; woman's underpants		< aghpuneq-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 aghpunghhak	aghpunghhxk	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 \u1085 \u1203 \u257 \u1082 \
Aghpuuget	F5g8usn	clan (a particular ~)		
\f2\i singular is 
\f0\i0 Aghpuuk													a particular clan						Aghpuget	Aghpxget	\uc0\u1040 \u1203 \u1087 \u1263 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \
aghpuugsaasiq	f5g8[c9cb2	baking powder			leavening agent												baking powder; leavening agent		< aghpuuk-sagh-(u)siq				aghpugsasiq	aghpxgsxsiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1263 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
aghpuuk	f5g8r	foam															foam		< aghpu-?-				aghpuk	aghpxk	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1263 \u1082 \
aghpuulleq	f5g8k]s2	blister		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 blister		< aghpuuk-lleq		CK Rub 116		aghpulleq	aghpxlleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghqaraataq	f52fh6nf2	noose		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 noose				CK Rub 112		aghqarataq	aghqarxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1088 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghqe-1	f52s-\'a1	offering (make an ~ of food for the deceased)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 eghqwaagh-													to make an offering of food for the deceased					aghqefik	aghqe-1	aghqe-1	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub aghqe-\super 2\nosupersub  	
\f0\b0 f52s-\'99			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > aghqelli-, aghqelngestaq, aghqestaaq, aghqitaghaq																			aghqe-2 	aghqe-2 	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub aghqefik	f52sabr	altar			offerings (place for making food ~ to the deceased)												place for making food offerings to the deceased (traditionally); altar		< aghqe\super 1\nosupersub -vik				aghqefik	aghqefik	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \

\f1\b aghqelengestaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f52sks3scnf2\super \'a1	\nosupersub primer for bullet															primer for bullet		< aghqe\super 2\nosupersub -?-ngestaq				aghqelengestaq1	aghqelengestaq1	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b aghqelengestaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f52sks3scnf2\super \'99	\nosupersub shallow water (or anything else)															shallow water (or anything else)		< aghqe\super 2\nosupersub -?-ngestaq				aghqelengestaq2	aghqelengestaq2	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 2\
aghqella	f52sk]z	seine															seine						aghqella	aghqella	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
aghqella-	f52sk]z-	fish with seine		Kiiwegni 
\f2\i aghqellaakut
\f0\i0 . \'91We 
\f2\i seined
\f0\i0  at the river.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 15)													to fish with seine						aghqella-	aghqella-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 -\
aghqelli-	f52sk]b-	lower (or make ~)		aghqelliiq \'91it is becoming lower, getting shallow\'92; aghqellii \'91he is lowering it, making it lower\'92 / aghqellii aghvighyaghaq \'91he made the crossing ramp lower\'92; naayvaq aghqelliighaghtuq \'91the lake is becoming shallow\'92	shallow (become ~)												to lower; to make lower; to become shallow		< aghqe\super 2\nosupersub -i\super 2\nosupersub -				aghqelli-	aghqelli-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
aghqeme-	f52svs-	crumble		aghqemuq \'91it shattered\'92 / aghqemtaa \'91he shattered it\'92; qayuusiq ifkaghlluku aghqemsimaa \'91by dropping the cup he made it shatter\'92;  aghqemuq anengani ullgitangyan\'91 he became envious when his older brother got a snowmachine\'92	shatter	envious (become ~)											to crumble; to shatter; to become envious				A&W 3		aghqeme-	aghqeme-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 -\
aghqengwaagh-	f52s3164-	sacrifice (make a ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to make a sacrifice	ghbyjcbnm d ;thnde xnj-k>	< aghqe\super 1\nosupersub -(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-		Rub. 114		aghqengwagh-	aghqengwxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
aghqestaaghhaq*	f52scn65f2	shoal			low thing												shoal; low thing		< aghqe\super 2\nosupersub -staaghhaq				aghqestaghhaq*	aghqestxghhaq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghqestaalleq	f52scn6k]s2	shoal		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)	
\f0\i0 low thing												shoal; low thing	vtkm	< aghqe\super 2\nosupersub -staaq-lleq		CK V & E 39; Rub 114		aghqestalleq	aghqestxlleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghqetghagh-	f52sn5f4-	crust over (of snow)		Ighivgaqun 
\f2\i aghqetghaqagu
\f0\i0  igleghllequnga. \'91I\'92ll leave when the snow 
\f2\i crusts over
\f0\i0  tonight.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 15)	travel on crusted snow	freeze over (of surface of snow)											to crust over (of snow); to travel on crusted snow; to freeze over (of surface of snow)		PE qi30t3a3- (under qi30-)				aghqetghagh-	aghqetghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aghqetghaq	f52sn5f2	refrozen ground in spring		
\f2\i caused by low termperatures at night after a warm day	
\f0\i0 frozen crust on snow												refrozen ground in spring; frozen crust on snow		PE qi30t3a3- (under qi30-)				aghqetghaq	aghqetghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghqiikw	f5271r	squeak or crunch of snow or pebbles under the feet		aghqiikw qiinghaghsaqegka qikmiiftuq \'91I looked out to check on the crunching noise and it turned out to be a dog\'92													squeak or crunch of snow or pebbles under the feet	crhbg. [hecn cytuf. ufkmrb gjl yjufvb			Rub. 113; A&W 4		aghqikw	aghqxkw	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1251 \u1265 \u1082 \
aghqiiwhtagh-	f5271[nf4-	make a crunching sound		aghqiiwhtaghtuq \'91he made a crunching sound\'92	crunching sound (make a ~)												to make a crunching sound		< aghqiikw		VK\'92s dict. revs.		aghqiwhtagh-	aghqxwhtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1251 \u1265 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Aghqitaghangha	F52bnf4fy4f	Troutman Lake (southern part of ~ which is next to Gambell)		
\f2\i literally 
\f0\i0 \'91the shallow area\'92; 
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 southern part of Troutman Lake which is next to Gambell		< aghqitaghaq-neq\super 3\nosupersub -
\f2\i possessed ending				
\f0\i0 Aghqitaghangha	Aghqitaghangha	\uc0\u1040 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \
aghqitaghaq	f52bnf4f2	shallow water															shallow water		< aghqe\super 2\nosupersub -?				aghqitaghaq	aghqitaghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghqulluk	f52ek]/r	northern fulmar			fulmar, northern	
\f2\i Fulmarus glacialis											
\f0\i0 northern fulmar (Fulmarus glacialis)						aghqulluk	aghqulluk	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
aghqunqaq	f52ey2f2	crest along mountainside			small depression	hole								curve			crest along mountainside; small depression; hole; curve				gloss 2, 3, 4 from CK Rub 113		aghqunqaq	aghqunqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghqutite-	f52enbns-	make sacrifices		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 sacrfices (make ~)												to make sacrifices		< aghqe\super 1\nosupersub -?		CK Rub 114		aghqutite-	aghqutite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghquugte-	f528[ns-	pale from illness		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 aghsugh-													to be pale from illness						aghqugte-	aghqxgte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghquutke-	f52enrs-	disaster (cause ~)		ulevelleghmeng aghquutkaqii yuget aangelghiimeng ikfiqmeng \'91the flood is causing the people hardship\'92 (?)	hardship (cause ~)												to cause disaster or hardship				CK Rub 114		aghqutke-	aghqxtke-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
aghquvlug-	f52edkeu-	depression (make a ~)			hollow out	dent (make a ~)							note that Rub. 113 has quite a bit about this, but not just the form as given here, more things like aghquvlungllagh- \'91to make a depression in it\'92, etc.; VK suggests that this can also be a verb directly, aghquvlug- \'91to have a depression, be hollowed out\'92 				to make a depressionor dent; to hollow out				A&W 4		aghquvlug-	aghquvlug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1083 \u1091 \u1075 -\
aghquvluk	f52edker	depression (hollow)		qulmesiin aghquvlukegtepigtuq \'91the cooking pot has a big dent\'92	hollow	dent							note that Rub. 113 has quite a bit about this, but not just the form as given here, more things like aghquvlungllagh- \'91to make a depression in it\'92, etc.; VK suggests that this can also be a verb directly, aghquvlug- \'91to have a depression, be hollowed out\'92 				depression; hollow; dent				A&W 4		aghquvluk	aghquvluk	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1083 \u1091 \u1082 \
aghsaakun	f5c9rey	cleanly		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 cleanly				CK Rub 116		aghsakun	aghsxkun	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
aghsaan	f5c9y	excessively		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  ugket taghyulipalghiim aghsaan taghyughnitkayuguut \'91when you put too much salt in cooked meat it tastes overly salty\'92; aghsaan tuuneghllagpenanga \'91don't give me too much\'92; aghsaan mekestaapiwaa \'91how small it is!\'92; movie aghsaan ayuqeftuq \'91the movie wasn\'92t very good\'92	overly	too much								not very much			excessively; overly; too much; not very much		< aghsagh-
\f2\i consequential mood				
\f0\i0 aghsan	aghsxn	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \
aghsagh-	f5cz4-			
\f2\i root 
\f0\i0 > aghsaghte-, aghsaghmete-, aghsaan															PE a3ca3-				aghsagh-	aghsagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
aghsaghmete-	f5cz4vsns-	good weather		aghsaghmetuq \'91it (the weather is good)\'92; aghsaghmetaa \'91he favors him\'92 / 	favor	pay particular attention (good or bad) toward (him)											to be good weather; to favor; to pay particular attention (good or bad) toward (him)		< aghsagh-mete-				aghsaghmete-	aghsaghmete-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghsaghtaghwaagh-	f5cz5nf4164-	give up from malice or out of vexation		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); questioned	
\f0\i0 quit from malice or out of vexation								check				to give up or quit from malice or out of vexation	cj pkf. c ljcfls jncnegbnmcz. \'f8gthty>\uc0\u960  vf[yenm herjq	< aghsaghte-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-		Rub. 116		aghsaghtaghwagh-	aghsaghtaghwxgh-	\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
aghsaghte-	f5cz5ns-	overdo		yugem aghsaghtawaaghyaqminigu ilani amyughaaghmeng, elngaatall qinuyugtekaa \'91when the man teased his friend too much that friend was greatly annoyed\'92	excessive (behave in an ~ way)	behave in an excessive way								annoy			to overdo; to behave in an excessive way; to annoy		< aghsagh-te\super 1\nosupersub -				aghsaghte-	aghsaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghsi	f5cb	thong holding shank to harpoon shaft		= aaghsi									or aaghsi? (Yupik Lore vol. 1 p. 170-174 has it both ways; curriculum manual only as aaghsi); Rub. glosses it also as \'91rope made from baleen\'92;; 
\f2\i see Harpoon Parts in Appendix				
\f0\i0 thong holding shank 
\f2\i (giimaq)
\f0\i0  to harpoon shaft				CK Rub 116		aghsi	aghsi	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \
aghsug-	f5c/u-	put baby down to sleep		aghsugaa \'91he put it (baby) down to sleep\'92 / aghsugiiq he put a baby down to sleep\'92; Taghnughhaqa 
\f2\i aghsugaqa
\f0\i0  qavaghyan. \'91I 
\f2\i lay down
\f0\i0  my child [in bed] when she went to sleep.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 16)													to put (a baby) down to sleep						aghsug-	aghsug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
aghsugh-	f5c/4-	pale (be or become ~)		aghsughtuq \'91he or it became pale\'92 / aghsughtaa \'91he bleached it\'92; 
\f2\i cf 
\f0\i0 aghquugte-	bleached (be or become ~)												to be or become pale; to be or become bleached		PE qakcu3 (under PE qak0(3)-)			aghsughtaq	aghsugh-	aghsugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\
Aghsughaleq	F5c/4fks2	site on the coast east of Gambell at Tiflighak Bay		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Tiflighak Bay (site on the coast east of Gambell at ~)												site on the coast east of Gambell at Tiflighak Bay						Aghsughaleq	Aghsughaleq	\uc0\u1040 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghsughpaglleq	f5c/5gf[k]s2	scratch, small															small scratch				CK Rub 116		aghsughpaglleq	aghsughpaglleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghsughtaq	f5c/5nf2	dried and bleached dried sealgut for making rain or wind parka			sealgut rain or wind parka												bleached dried sealgut for making rain or wind parka; sealgut rain or wind parka		< aghsugh-te\super 1\nosupersub -aq				aghsughtaq	aghsughtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghsugutaq 	f5c/uenf2	crib for baby to sleep in															crib for baby to sleep in		< aghsug-(u)taq				aghsugutaq 	aghsugutaq 	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghtaghagh-	f5nf4f4-	light (become ~)		aghtaghaghtuq \'91it is becoming light\'92 / 													to become light		< aghte-?-				aghtaghagh-	aghtaghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aghte-	f5ns-	dawn comes		aghtuq \'91it is dawn, it has become day\'92 / aghhutanga maliglluku aliighaa \'91it cleared up as it became day\'92; aghhutaa \'91day came upon him\'92; = eghte-	day breaks												to dawn; for day to break		PE e30-\super 2			\nosupersub aghtaghagh-, aghneq, aghhunneghagu	aghte-	aghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghteq-	f5ns2-			
\f2\i root
\f0\i0  > aghteqeregaaq, aghteqeregagh-, aghtequq																			aghteq-	aghteq-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 -\
aghteqeregaaq	f5ns2shsu62	puffball			
\f2\i Bovista sp.												
\f0\i0 puffball
\f2\i  (Bovista sp.)		
\f0\i0 < aghteq-?		from Aynganga\'92s \'93Beringia\'94 article		aghteqeregaq	aghteqeregxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 \
aghteqeregagh-	f5ns2shsuf4-	snack on roots or greens with blubber and raw meat															to snack on roots or greens with blubber and raw meat		< aghteq-?-				aghteqeregagh-	aghteqeregagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aghtequq	f5ns2e2	dish of roots or greens with blubber and raw meat		Nunivagmeng 
\f2\i aghtequlighluku
\f0\i0  neghtunga. \'91I ate, having rosewort as a 
\f2\i side dish
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 17)													dish of roots or greens with blubber and raw meat		< aghteq-?				aghtequq	aghtequq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
aghtequsaq	f5ns2ecz2	blubber eaten with roots or greens															blubber eaten with roots or greens		< aghtequq-?				aghtequsaq	aghtequsaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
aghtugh-	f5ne4-	unable to manage, bear, withstand or accomplish		aghtughaa \'91he can't bear it or can't do it\'92 / aghtiigatuq \'91he isn't stopped by difficulties\'92; Neqesghanka esghaneghmeng 
\f2\i aghtughanka
\f0\i0  pightum. \'91Because of the blowing snow I 
\f2\i couldn\'92t
\f0\i0  see my fox baits.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 130)													to be unable to manage, bear, withstand or accomplish		PE a3tu3-			aghtughyaghqanghilleq	aghtugh-	aghtugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
aghtughyaghqanghilleq	f5ne4mz52fy4bk]s2	power		
\f2\i used in Bible translation													
\f0\i0 power		< aghtugh-yaghqaq-neq\super 1\nosupersub -(ng)igh-lleq				aghtughyaghqanghilleq	aghtughyaghqanghilleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghtuneq	f5neys2	lowest level of the atmosphere near the earth			atmosphere (lowest level of ~, near the earth)												the lowest level of the atmosphere near the earth						aghtuneq	aghtuneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghu-	f4e-	rot		aghuuq or aghwaa \'91it rotted\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  aghusi	decompose	ripen or overripen											to rot; to (over)ripen; to decompose		PE a3u-			aghukaq	aghu-	aghu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 -\
aghukaq 	f4erf2	rotten thing			ripe or overripe thing												rotten thing; (over)ripe thing		< aghu-(g)kaq				aghukaq 	aghukaq 	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghula	f4ekz	Eskimo (style) dance			dance, Eskimo-style												Eskimo-style dance		PE a3ula-				aghula	aghula	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \
aghula-	f4ekz-	shake (as to wake up a person)		aghulaaq \'91he is dancing\'92, \'91it is moving back and forth\'92 / aghulataa \'91he shook her/it\'92	dance Eskimo-style	Eskimo-style (dance ~)								move back and forth (as of something hanging)			to dance Eskimo-style; to shake (as to wake up a person); to move back and forth (as of something hanging)		PE a3ula-			aghulaqe-, aghulaghqugh-, aghulate-, aghulaatat, aghuliigh-	aghula-	aghula-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 -\
aghulaataq	f4ek6nf2	fishing line stick		
\f2\i plural,
\f0\i0  aghulaatat, 
\f2\i used for one such device													
\f0\i0 stick on which one winds fishing line lengthwise over the notched ends		< aghula-?-(u)taq				aghulataq	aghulxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghulaatat 	f4ek9nfn	stick for winding fishing line															stick for winding fishing line		< aghula-?-(u)taq-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 aghulatat 	aghulxtat 	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \
aghulaghqugh-	f4ekz52e4-	go to gather greens		aghulaghqughtuq \'91she went to gather greens\'92 /	greens (go to gather ~)												to go to gather edible greens		< aghula-?-				aghulaghqugh-	aghulaghqugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
aghulaghwaagh-	f4ekz4164-	flutter		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 fly	sway							could it also be aghulangwaagh-?; clarify gloss				to fly, flutter, or sway	hfpdtdfnmcz. rjks[fnmcz	< aghula-(ngw/ghw/w)aagh-		Rub. 33		aghulaghwagh-	aghulaghwxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
aghulaqe-	f4ekz2s-	leave		aghulaquq \'91he left\'92 / aghulaqutaa \'91he took it with him when he went\'92									Rub. gives aghulaqute- with the additional meaning \'91to bury\'92 -- check				to leave		PE a3ulla3- (under PE a3ula-); < aghula-?-				aghulaqe-	aghulaqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aghulasiq	f4ekzcb2	dance movement that goes with a particular song															dance movement that goes with a particular song		< aghula-(u)siq		VK		aghulasiq	aghulasiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
aghulate-	f4ekzns-	shake		aghulatuq \'91it shook\'92; aghulataa \'91he shook it\'92 / iiggakun aghulataa \'91he shook hands with her\'92; anuqem veglluk agaghngalghii aghulataa \'91the wind is shaking the towel hanging on the line\'92													to shake		PE a3ulat- (under PE a3ula-); < aghula-te\super 1\nosupersub -				aghulate-	aghulate-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghuliigh-	f4ek74-	stop moving		aghuliightuq \'91he or it stopped\'92 / aghuliightaa \'91he stopped it, made it stop\'92													to stop moving		+ PY a3ulai3- (under PE a3ula-); < aghula-(ng)igh-				aghuligh-	aghulxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
aghuqe-	f4e2s-	distribute shares of a catch gifts		aghuqaa \'91he gave a share to her \'91/ aghuqiiq \'91he is distributing things to people\'92	distribute gifts												to distribute shares of a catch; to distribute gifts		PY a3uq0-				aghuqe-	aghuqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aghusi 	f4ecb	parka (waterproof ~ made from large intestine of walrus)		
\f2\i may be used in dual, 
\f0\i0 aghusik, 
\f2\i or plural,
\f0\i0  aghusit, 
\f2\i for a single parka; cf. 
\f0\i0 aghu-	gutskin raincoat	raincoat, gutskin											waterproof parka made from large intestine of walrus; gutskin raincoat				A&W 4	aghusingwaaq	aghusi 	aghusi 	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \

\f1\b aghusingwaaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f4ecb3162\super \'a1	\nosupersub waterproof skin-boot			skin-boot, waterproof												waterproof skin-boot		< aghusi-(ngw/ghw/w)aaq				aghusingwaq1	aghusingwxq1	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 1\

\f1\b aghusingwaaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f4ecb3162\super \'99	\nosupersub seashell															seashell		< aghusiq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK Rub 34		aghusingwaq2	aghusingwxq2	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 2\
aghusiq	f4ecb2	aging food (vessel for ~ )			vessel for aging food												vessel for aging food		< aghu-(u)siq		from the junior dictionary, p. 16		aghusiq	aghusiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
aghvaghlluk	f4df5k]/r	clear sky all around															clear sky all around		< aghvaq-lluk				aghvaghlluk	aghvaghlluk	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
aghvak	f4dfr	edge of hand away from thumb		
\f2\i plural used for one person's hands' edges: 
\f0\i0 aghvagenka \'91the edges of my hands\'92													edge of hand away from thumb		PE a3va!				aghvak	aghvak	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
aghvaq	f4df2	bright sky seen in the distance along the horizon and indicating good weather to come		aghvaq taakwa mayughtuq \'91the band of clear sky is spreading upward from the bottom\'92													bright sky seen in the distance along the horizon and indicating good weather to come					aghvaghlluk	aghvaq	aghvaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b aghveghaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f4ds4f2\super \'a1	\nosupersub bowhead whale calf			calf of bowhead whale	
\f2\i Balaena mysticetus											
\f0\i0 bowhead whale calf
\f2\i  (Balaena mysticetus)		
\f0\i0 < aghveq-ghaq				aghveghaq1	aghveghaq1	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b aghveghaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f4ds4f2\super \'99	\nosupersub ridge of roof		
\f2\i cf.  
\f0\i0 aghveq													ridge of a roof				CK Rub 28		aghveghaq2	aghveghaq2	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 2\
aghveghaqetaq	f4ds4f2snf2	pole in center of outer room of the traditional dome-shaped house															pole in center of outer room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< aghveghaq\super 2\nosupersub -?				aghveghaqetaq	aghveghaqetaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghveghllugaq	f4ds5k]/uf2	grey whale calf			calf of grey whale	
\f2\i Eschrichtius robustus											
\f0\i0 grey whale calf
\f2\i  (Eschrichtius robustus)		
\f0\i0 < aghvegh-lluk-ghaq		CK Rub 29		aghveghllugaq	aghveghllugaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghveghpak	f4ds5gfr	blue mussel			mussel, blue												blue mussel		< aghveq-ghpak (?)				aghveghpak	aghveghpak	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
aghveghqutaq	f4ds52enf2	blade of whaling harpoon			whaling harpoon blade												blade of whaling harpoon		< aghveq-qutaq				aghveghqutaq	aghveghqutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghveghwaaq	f4ds4162	piece cut from the flukes of a whale and used by little boys while playing at whaling			figurine of a whale or other thing shaped like a whale												piece cut from the flukes of a whale and used by little boys while playing at whaling; figurine of a whale or other thing shaped like a whale		< aghveq-(ngw/ghw/w)aaq				aghveghwaq	aghveghwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
aghvenge-	f4ds3s-	catch whale		angyat aghvengut \'91the boat caught a whale\'92	whale (catch ~)												to catch whale		< aghveq-nge-		CK 		aghvenge-	aghvenge-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 -\
aghvengyuqaq	f4ds3m/2f2	successful proficient skilled whale-hunter			whale-hunter (successful proficient skilled)												successful proficient skilled whale-hunter		< aghvenge-yu-qaq				aghvengyuqaq	aghvengyuqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghvepik	f4dsgbr	bowhead whale			
\f2\i Balaena mysticetus	
\f0\i0 whale (bowhead ~)											bowhead whale (Balaena mysticetus)		PE a3v0pi! (under PE a3v03); < aghveq-pik 				aghvepik	aghvepik	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
aghveq	f4ds2	whale		Iqallugestun meghmi kiyaghtaqut. Iwernga 
\f2\i aghveghet
\f0\i0  iqallugunghitut. \'91Like fish they live in the water; however 
\f2\i whales
\f0\i0  are not fish.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 64)													whale		PE a3v03			aghveghqutaq, aghveghwaaq, aghveghaq, aghveghpak, aghvepik, aghveqengertaq, aghveqinghaq, aghveqi-, aghvesiiq, aghvesak	aghveq	aghveq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghveqaghtaatek	f4ds2f5n6nsr	bolas															bolas		< aghveqaghtagh-(u)n-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 aghveqaghtatek	aghveqaghtxtek	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
aghveqaghtagh-	f4ds2f5nf4-	hunt with bolas			bolas (hunts with ~)												to hunt with bolas						aghveqaghtagh-	aghveqaghtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aghveqe-	f4ds2s-	harpoon a whale		aghveqaa \'91he stuck it\'92 / aghveqiiq \'91he struck a whale\'92	strike a whale												to harpoon (a whale); to strike (a whale)		< aghveq-ke\super 1\nosupersub - 				aghveqe-	aghveqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aghveqe- 	f4ds2s- 	shingles (have ~, the disease)		aghvequq \'91he has shingles\'92	
\f2\i Herpes zoster
\f0\i0  (have shingles, the disease)												to have shingles, the disease \'96 
\f2\i Herpes zoster						
\f0\i0 aghveqe- 	aghveqe- 	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aghveqengertaq	f4ds2s3sinf2	harbor porpoise			porpoise, harbor	
\f2\i Phocoena phocoena											
\f0\i0 harbor porpoise
\f2\i  (Phocoena phocoena)		
\f0\i0 < aghveq-?				aghveqengertaq	aghveqengertaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1096 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghveqenghaq	f4ds2sy4f2	whales, a few, swimming together															a few whales swimming together		< aghveq-?		CK Rub 28		aghveqenghaq	aghveqenghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghveqi-	f4ds2b-	strike a whale		aghveqiiq \'91he struck a whale\'92													to strike a whale		< aghveqe-i\super 1\nosupersub -		from junior dictionary p. 19		aghveqi-	aghveqi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \u1080 -\
aghveqinghaq	f4ds2by4f2	whale stew															whale stew		< aghveq-qinghaq				aghveqinghaq	aghveqinghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghvequte-	f4ds2ens-	fall forward hard		aghvequtuq \'91he fell forward\'92 / aghvequtestaa \'91he made him fall forward\'92; aghvequsalghiimi quulvaqaaneng pikegken aga taluqaghtengnginaamaghmi meghmun \'91when he plunged from a considerable height he fell right into the water\'92	plunge to the ground from a height												to fall forward hard; to plunge to the ground from a height						aghvequte-	aghvequte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghvesak	f4dsczr	bowhead whale, large			
\f2\i Balaena mysticetus												
\f0\i0 large bowhead whale
\f2\i  (Balaena mysticetus)		
\f0\i0 < aghveq-?				aghvesak	aghvesak	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
aghvesiiq	f4dsc72	humpback whale			
\f2\i Megaptera novaeangliae	
\f0\i0 whale (humpback ~)											humpback whale 
\f2\i (Megaptera novaeangliae)		
\f0\i0 < aghveq-?-				aghvesiq	aghvesxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \

\f1\b aghveyugagh\super 1\nosupersub -  	
\f0\b0 f4ds/uf4\super \'a1\nosupersub -	semicircular (be ~)															to be semicircular				CK Rub 29		aghveyugagh1-  	aghveyugagh1-  	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 1-\
aghveyugaq	f4ds/uf2	half-round file			file, half-round	ridge of roof								base of hill			half-round file; ridge of roof; base of hill						aghveyugaq	aghveyugaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1099 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghvig-	f4dbu-	wash clothes		aghvigaa \'91he washed it\'92 / aghvigiiq \'91he washed some clothes\'92													to wash clothes		PE 03(0)vi!- (under PE 030-\super 1\nosupersub )				aghvig-	aghvig-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 -\
aghvigaq	f4dbuf2	washed laundry		
\f2\i Aghviganka
\f0\i0  eslakun iniinka. \'91I hung my 
\f2\i laundry
\f0\i0  outdoors.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 64)	laundry, washed												washed laundry		< aghvig-aq				aghvigaq	aghvigaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghvigh-	f4db4-	across (go ~)		aghvightuq \'91he crossed over\'92; aghvighaa \'91he crossed it\'92 / aghviitaa \'91he took it across\'92; kestilghiini iigget aghviqiinaghaqluteng piiqut \'91when counting one crosses back and forth from hand to hand\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 maaghraghvinlek	go across	go over								leave St. Lawrence Is. for Chukotka			to go across; to cross over; to leave St. Lawrence Is. for Chukotka		PE a3vi3-				aghvigh-	aghvigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 -\
aghvighqun	f4db52ey	rope that is attached to the bottom of the keel and the side of a boat forstability															rope that is attached to the bottom of the keel and the side of a boat for stability		< aghvigh-?-(u)n		CK Rub 28		aghvighqun	aghvighqun	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
aghvightaq	f4db5nf2	game played by boys involving throwing rocks at a target			target (boys' game involving throwing rocks at a ~)												boys' game involving throwing rocks at a target		< aghvigh-te\super 1\nosupersub -aq				aghvightaq	aghvightaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Aghvightek	F4db5nsr	Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. (projection of land into lagoon from near the center of the barrier isthmus of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 projection of land into lagoon from near the center of the barrier isthmus of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		< aghvigh-(s)ta-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 Aghvightek	Aghvightek	\uc0\u1040 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
aghvigisiq	f4dbubcb2	washing machine		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 aghvigisik
\f2\i , for one washing machine or tub	
\f0\i0 washtub												washing machine; washtub		< aghvig-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				aghvigisiq	aghvigisiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
aghvigisiq	f4dbubcb2	water for washing clothes			detergent												water for washing clothes; detergent		< aghvig-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				aghvigisiq	aghvigisiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
aghvik	f4dbr	scraper made from walrus ivory		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 aghvigek, 
\f2\i for a single scraper													
\f0\i0 scraper made from walrus ivory				CK Rub 27		aghvik	aghvik	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
Aghvillgha aghneq 	F4dbk]5f f4ys2	Friday		
\f2\i from Friday being the sixth day of the week													
\f0\i0 Friday		< aghvigh-lleq + aghneq				Aghvillgha aghneq 	Aghvillgha aghneq 	\uc0\u1040 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1072  \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aghvilqaghtaq	f4dbk]2f5nf2	group of six			six (group of ~)												a group of six		< aghvigh-?		CK Rub 27		aghvilqaghtaq	aghvilqaghtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghvinlek	f4dbyksr	six															six		< aghvigh-neq\super 1\nosupersub -lek				aghvinlek	aghvinlek	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
Aghviqaghfiget	F4db2f5abusn	Meregta-Gambell Trail		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Gambell-Meregta Trail												the Meregta-Gambell Trail						Aghviqaghfiget	Aghviqaghfiget	\uc0\u1040 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1092 \u1080 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \
aghviqaq	f4db2f2	crossed (one who has ~ over)			International Dateline	Dateline (International ~)											one who has crossed over; International Dateline		< aghvigh-kaq\super 1				\nosupersub aghviqaq	aghviqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghyanegh-	f4mzys4-	hurry		aghyaneghtuq \'91he rushed\'92 / aghyaghuunnaqelghiit aghyanghutaqeftut \'91the ones going boating are rushing about\'92; kingunnayukangatni aghyaneghtuq \'91he rushed around in case he was late\'92	get ready fast	rush											to hurry; to get ready fast; to rush				A&W 5	aghyaniqe-	aghyanegh-	aghyanegh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 -\
aghyanghute-	f4mzyb4ens-	rush around		aghyanghutuq \'91he rushed around\'92													to rush around		< aghyanegh-(u)te-				aghyanghute-	aghyanghute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aghyaniqe-	f4mzyb2s-	rush around		aghyaniquq \'91he rushed around\'92													to rush around		< aghyanegh-liqe-				aghyaniqe-	aghyaniqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aghyugh-	f4m/4-	old (get ~)		aghyughtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aghyughaa \'91he or it is getting old\'92 / aghyuqaghllak, aghyuumaasuk, aghyuumaghlluk, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aghyughllakaq \'91a very old, perhaps rotten, thing\'92	age (grow old)												to get old; to age		PE a3(0)yu-				aghyugh-	aghyugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
aghyughqaq	f4m/52f2	old person			aged food	old thing											old person; aged food; old thing		< aghyugh-kaq\super 1				\nosupersub aghyughqaq	aghyughqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghyughsigh-	f4m/5cb4-	age food as a means of storage and/or preparation		aghyughsightuq \'91he aged food\'92; aghyughsighaa \'91he aged it\'92 /													to age food as a means of storage and/or preparation		< aghyugh-sigh-				aghyughsigh-	aghyughsigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
aghyughsighaq	f4m/5cb4f2	aged food			food, aged												aged food		< aghyughsigh-aq				aghyughsighaq	aghyughsighaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
aghyuqe-	f4m/2s-	homesick (be ~)		aghyuquq \'91he is homesick\'92 / aghyuqutaa \'91he is tired of it or her\'92	tired (be ~ of (it/him))												to be homesick; to be tired of (it/him)		PY-S a3yuq0- (under PE a3(0)yu-)				aghyuqe-	aghyuqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aghyuugh-	f4m04-	scold		aghyuughaa \'91he scolded her, spanked her \'91/ aghyuughiiq \'91he scolded or spanked someone\'92	spank												to scold; to spank		PY-S a3yu3-				aghyugh-	aghyxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 -\
aghyuuniigh-	f4m0y74-	scold someone		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check vowel lengths				to scold someone	cbkmyj heufnm. ,hfybnm rjuj-k>	< aghyuugh-?-		Rub. 34		aghyunigh-	aghyxnxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
aghyuutagh-	f4mm0nf4-	strict (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  aghyuutalghii \'91strict person\'92													to be strict	cnhjubq	< aghyuugh-tagh\super 2\nosupersub -		Rub. 34		aghyutagh-	aghyxtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
agi	fub	sister-in-law (brother\'92s wife or wife\'92s sister) of a man		that is, man's brother's wife, or man's wife's sister, or woman's sister's husband, or woman's husband's brother; 	brother-in-law (sister\'92s husband or husband\'92s brother) of a woman												sister-in-law (either brother\'92s wife or wife\'92s brother) of a man; brother-in-law (either sister\'92s husband or husband\'92s sister) of a woman		PE a!i				agi	agi	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \
agigpughagh-	fub[ge4f4-	peek in		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 look down from the top 												to peek in; to look down from the top 	pfukzlsdfnm relf-k> cdth[e dybp	< agigte-?-		Rub. 23		agigpughagh-	agigpughagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1093 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Agigsaghvik	fub[cz4dbr	site in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka		< agigte-sagh-vik		Men. 1972, 1975		agighsaghvik	agighsaghvik	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
agigseghwaaghvik	fub[cs4164dbr	lookout			vantage point	viewpoint											lookout; vantage point; viewpoint		< agigte-?-(ngw/ghw/w)aagh-vik				agigseghwaghvik	agigseghwxghvik	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1093 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
agigselghaq	fub[csk4f2	high place for observation		nanevgaq esghapagaquq qavrelegnun agigselghaneng \'91the old man is watching the place with migrating walrus from the high place\'92	observation place												high place for observation				CK Rub 23		agigselghaq	agigselghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1093 \u1089 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
agigte-	fub[ns-	peek over		agigtuq \'91he went up to look around, he peeked over\'92 / agigutaa \'91he took it up or met him at the high spot\'92	look around from a vantage point	go to a higher point											to peek over; to look around from a vantage point; to go to a high point 		PY-S a!i!t0-				agigte-	agigte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
agipaneq	fubgfys2	hole		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 hole	lshrf			Rub. 22		agipaneq	agipaneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
agitagh-	fubnf4-	open-mouthed		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  agitaghtuq \'91he opened his mouth\'92; agitaghtaa \'91he opened its mouth or spread it open\'92; agitaghngaaq \'91he has his mouth open\'92; pumsukegtaatek agitaghtaak \'91he opened the scissors\'92													open-mouthed		PE a!itta3-				agitagh-	agitagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
agitagha-	fubnf4f-	yawn		agitaghaaq \'91he yawned\'92 / agitaghaaghaataghtuq \'91he keeps yawning\'92													to yawn		< agitagh-?-				agitagha-	agitagha-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 -\
agivike-	fubdbrs-	take one\'92s share of the catch to one\'92s inlaws when one is a newlywed man		agivikiiq \'91he (the future son-in-law) gave food to his fiance\'92s family\'92; nulightunghhaaluteng mekelghiighet neqetateng nengiteng sakimeggnun aglaatkayugit neghighluku salin nengughtellghilluteng aatghi agivikusat \'91after having recently gotten married, young men used to bring over the food they\'92d caught, their shares, to their inlaws and establishing domestic relationships that way they were called 
\f2\i agivik
\f0\i0 s.\'92									check this whole thing				to take one\'92s share of the catch to one\'92s inlaws when one is a newlywed man		< agi-vik-ke\super 1\nosupersub -		A&W 5		agivike-	agivike-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
aglagh-	fukz4-	go home		aglaghtuq \'91he went over\'92, \'91he went home\'92 / aglaataa \'91he took it over or home\'92; aglamsaagtuq \'91he finally went over or home\'92	home (go ~)	go over from one place to another											to go home; to go from one place to another		PE ag0-				aglagh-	aglagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 -\
aglaquq	fukz2e2	socket for mast of ship															socket for a mast of ship				CK Rub 23		aglaquq	aglaquq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
agleghnagh-	fuks4yf4-	sacred (be ~)															to be sacred		< aglegh-nagh-				agleghnagh-	agleghnagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\fs20 Agleghnalghii Taghneghaq	Fuks4yfk47 Nf4ys4f2	
\fs24 Holy Ghost		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  Agleghnalghiik Taghneghak													Holy Ghost		< agleghnagh-lghii + taghneghaq			xxxt	Agleghnalghi Taghneghaq	Agleghnalghx Taghneghaq	\uc0\u1040 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251  \u1058 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
agleghnaq	fuks4yf2	revered thing			sacred thing												revered thing; sacred thing		< aglegh-naq				agleghnaq	agleghnaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
agleghu	fuks4e	mourning ceremony		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); direct nominalization of verb
\f0\i0  agleghu-									this appears to be a direct nominalization or nominal counterpart of agleghu- \'91to follow traditional abstinence practices\'92 -- are both legitimate?				mourning ceremony	nhfehysq j,hzl gj evthitve	< aglegh-(ng)u-		Rub. 23		agleghu	agleghu	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \
agleghu-	fuks4e-	follow traditional abstinence practices			abstinence (follow traditional ~ practices)												to follow traditional abstinence practices		< aglegh-(ng)u-				agleghu-	agleghu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 -\
aglekesegaq	fuksrscsuf2	Steller's eider 			eider, Steller\'92s	
\f2\i Polysticta stelleri							
\f0\i0 given in junior dictionary as \'93harlequin duck\'94				Steller's eider 
\f2\i  (Polysticta stelleri)						
\f0\i0 aglekesegaq	aglekesegaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
agleq	fuks2	person who is following traditional abstinence practices			abstainer												person who is following traditional abstinence practices		PE a!l03(-)				agleq	agleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
aglug-	fuk/u-	rummage		aglugtuq \'91he rummaged through something\'92; aglugaa \'91he rummaged through it\'92 / 													to rummage		PE a!lu!-				aglug-	aglug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -\
Aglughaaq	Fuk/462	Silook camp (site on northern shore of Koozata Lagoon near ~)		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on northern shore of Koozata Lagoon near Silook camp						Aglughaq	Aglughxq	\uc0\u1040 \u1075 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \
aglughtaq	fuk/5nf2	mast step of a boat			clamp holding sail to mast												mast step of a boat; clamp holding sail to mast		< agluk-taq\super 1\nosupersub  (?)				aglughtaq	aglughtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
agluk, aglu	fuk/r. fuk/	jaw		agluk tespika \'91up there there is a rainbow\'92; aghveghem aglaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aghveghem awlaa \'91the whale\'92s jawbone\'92	rainbow	jawbone											jaw; rainbow; jawbone		PE a!lu3		awlaa is from SLI JR. DICT. p. 113		agluk, aglu	agluk, aglu	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 , \u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1102 \
aglungqaghtagh-	fuk/32f5nf4-	chattering teeth (have ~)		aglungqaghtaghtuq \'91his teeth are chattering\'92 /													to have chattering teeth		< agluk-?-				aglungqaghtagh-	aglungqaghtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
agnepa	fuysgf	probably		
\f2\i particle; especially in reference to something one wishes were not so; 
\f0\i0 Sangamek qamuqagka qamiyek sangyaghqwaagakek? 
\f2\i Agnepa
\f0\i0  meghnughyingalghiinga. \'91Why has the sled that I\'92ve been pulling become harder to pull? 
\f2\i It must be 
\f0\i0 that I am tired.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 123); = awnepa	maybe	must be											probably; maybe; must be		from Chukchi ewn0pe \'91probably\'92				agnepa	agnepa	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \
agnigha-	fuyb4f-	undecided (be ~)		kiiwek maaqeghllagek aghvighnalukek naqam agnighaluni pinghituq \'91he had been going to cross the swift river but after hesitating he didn\'92t do it\'92; qikmiq agnighaaghlluni meghmun nalugutuq \'91the dog hesitated briefly and then jumped into the water\'92	hesitate								check if the base is agnigh- or agnigha- or what				to be undecided; to hesitate				A&W 5		agnigha-	agnigha-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 -\
agniigh-	fuy74-	flow steadily		esneghak ilutmun agniighaqeftuk \'91the lagoon is steadily running inward\'92									check				to flow steadily				A&W 5		agnigh-	agnxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
agniqe-	fuyb2s-	angry (be ~ (of a woman))		
\f2\i applies to women only; for men's anger see
\f0\i0  qefliqe-; agniquq \'91she is angry\'92 / agniqutaa \'91she is angry at him or her\'92; Aghnam 
\f2\i agniqutaa
\f0\i0  qikmiq neghiilghii. \'91The woman 
\f2\i got angry
\f0\i0  at the dog when it ate [some of their food]\'92. (SLI JR. DICT. 11)	mad (be ~ (of a woman))	furious (be ~ (of a woman))											to be mad, angry  or furious (of a woman)						agniqe-	agniqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
agrepae	fuhsgfs	colic			pain (sudden ~ in abdomen)												colic; sudden pain in abdomen		from Chukchi e!r0p0k \'91to suffer from colic\'92	14			agrepae	agrepae	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1099 \
agtugh-	f[ne4-	touch lightly		agtughaa \'91he or it touched it lightly\'92 / agtuutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  touched each other, came into contact\'92; agtuutegpenani whangkunnun aghulaquq ima \'91too bad, he left without even contacting us\'92	contact (come into ~)												to touch lightly; to come into contact; to contact		PE a!tu3-				agtugh-	agtugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
agtughtangilleq	f[ne5nf3bkms2	secluded area															secluded area		< agtugh-?-(ng)ite-lleq		CK Rub 112		agtughtangilleq	agtughtangilleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
agugh-	fue4-	bending		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0 agughtuq \'91it bent, he made a turn on his way\'92; agughtaa \'91he bent it\'92; agughngaaq \'91it is bent\'92	turning												bending; turning						agugh-	agugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
agughpagtagh-	fue5gf[nf4-	warp		imaqun suqaq agughpagtaghtuq \'91too bad, the baleen warped\'92; tumet agughpagtaghngalghiit \'91a crooked road or trail\'92	crooked (become ~)												to warp; to become crooked		< agugh-ghpak-tagh\super 3\nosupersub -				agughpagtagh-	agughpagtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
agvate-	fudfns-	return to one\'92s upbringing (?)											fix definition				to return to one\'92s upbringing (?)	jnlfdfnm yf djcgbnfybt			CK Rub 21		agvate-	agvate-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1074 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
agzighte-	fupb5ns-	delay (stubbornly and sullenly ~ in doing what one has been told to do)		agzightuq \'91he is stubbornly delaying\'92 / agzighneq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  agzighmelnguq \'91one who delays in obeying instructions\'92; Taghtughtekaqsaghaqa 
\f2\i agzighllaataghtuq
\f0\i0 . \'91I woke him up, but he 
\f2\i is still not responding
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 12)	unresponsive when someone tries to awaken one												to stubbornly and sullenly delay in doing what one has been told to do; to be unresponsive when someone tries to awaken one						agzighte-	agzighte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1079 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ahaa	fu6	yes		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  ahaa saaqesteggu taawa nengnguteggu \'91okay now go ahead and start pulling the rope\'92; \'93Qamaay! Neghsaghsi tagivaghteggu.\'94 Arepakim pimakanga, \'93
\f2\i Ahaa
\f0\i0  tuunaqaqa.\'94 \'91\'93You in there! Give me your seal.\'94 Said Arepaki, \'93
\f2\i Okay
\f0\i0 , I am going to give it to you.\'94\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 27)	okay	ready											yes; okay; ready			x			aha	ahx	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u257 \
ahaam	fu6v	enough!		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  = haam; > ahaamangam	that\'92s enough	all right								so be it			enough!; that's enough; all right; so be it		from Chukchi ?	x			aham	ahxm	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u257 \u1084 \
ahaamangam	fu6vf3fv	enough!		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 mekelghiiq kilgaaqughllalghii qenwat nanevgam pimakanga, \'93Ahaamangam, tawatengam, meghnalilghaaten\'94 \'91a boy was running so much, finally an old man said to him, \'93There, enough, rest now\'94\'92 	that\'92s enough	all right								so be it			enough!; that's enough; all right; so be it		< ahaam-?-ngam				ahamangam	ahxmangam	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u257 \u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
ahaaw	fu61	anyone there?		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  = haaw													is anyone there?		from Chukchi ?	x			ahaw	ahxw	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u257 \u1265 \
ahay	fufq	what?		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 yes? 
\f2\i (in answer to a call)												
\f0\i0 what? yes? 
\f2\i (in answer to a call)		
\f0\i0 from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 20 CK 		ahay	ahay	\uc0\u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1253 \
akag-	frfu-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > akamka, akangquq															PE ak9a!-				akag-	akag-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1075 -\
akagte-	frf[ns-	clean (remove dirt)		akagtaa \'91he cleaned it\'92 / akagtiiq \'91he cleaned something\'92	scrape clean (skins and the like)												to clean; to scrape clean (skins and the like)						akagte-	akagte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akamka	frfvrf	circle			ring												circle; ring		< akag-?-				akamka	akamka	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \
akamkegsagh-	frfvrs[cf4-	make (it) round		akamkegsaghaa \'91he rounded it, made it round\'92													to make (it) round		< akamka-?-sagh-				akamkegsagh-	akamkegsagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 -\
akamkegtaq	frfvrs[nf2	cylindrical object			round thing												cylindrical object; round thing		< akamka-kegtaq				akamkegtaq	akamkegtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
akangquq	frf32e2	knot in wood		akangqghwa \'91its knot\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kaangquq													knot in wood		PE ak0qu3; < akag-quq				akangquq	akangquq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
akeleghraaq	frsks4h62	between (area in ~)		Taan'gantuq naayvam esnengani wallu taakut Anangiinkutlu Kegyuuqenkutlu, naantuq taakwani 
\f2\i akeleghraaghitni
\f0\i0  aghqesaghtughvik. \'91The altar (place for making food offerings was there on the shore of the lake, or it was somewhere in the 
\f2\i area in between
\f0\i0  Anangiq\'92s family\'92s house and Kegyuuqen\'92s family\'92s house.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:144); Taakuk ingaghtaqelghiik 
\f2\i akeleghraaqluku
\f0\i0 , llaaghanwha ghhuusigalkanga. \'91 Whenever the two of them lay down to sleep they put him 
\f2\i between
\f0\i0  them, and thus he didn\'92t get cold.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 73)													area in between		< akuliq-?				akeleghraq	akeleghrxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
akemna 	frsvyf	one far away		
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  akm-; 
\f2\i obscured demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 akmum \'91(of) the one way over there\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 akemkut \'91those way over there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative: 
\f0\i0 akemyuq \'91you, way over there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: 
\f0\i0 taakemna \'91that one, way over there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  akmani \'91there, way over there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  akmavek \'91to way over there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 akmagun \'91through way over there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb: 
\f0\i0 akmaken \'91from way over there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional: 
\f0\i0 akma \'91way over there!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 taakmani \'91there, way over there\'92	outside (one ~ of Alaska or ~ of the St. Lawrence Island area of Alaska)	southeast (one toward the ~)											that one way over there; that one outside of Alaska or outside of the St. Lawrence Island area of Alaska; that one toward the southeast		PE dem. ak0m-				akemna 	akemna 	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
akeqe-	frs2s-	promise		akeqaa \'91he promised him\'92 / 
\f2\i Akequmaanga
\f0\i0  taginnaqnilunga qayumeng. \'91He 
\f2\i promised
\f0\i0  me (saying that) he would bring me some tea.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 4)													to promise		PY-S ak0q0-				akeqe-	akeqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
akeqsagte-	frs2cz[ns-	threaten		akeqsagtaa \'91he threatened him\'92 /													to threaten		< akeqe-?-				akeqsagte-	akeqsagte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akequsaq	frs2ecz2	promise		\'85 pikaq, \'93Una qayuusiq Kiyaghneghem nutaghaaguq 
\f2\i akequsaa
\f0\i0  \'85.\'94 \'91\'85 He said, \'93This cup is God\'92s new 
\f2\i covenant
\f0\i0  \'85.\'94\'92 (1 Corinthians 11.25) 	promised thing	covenant											promise; promised thing; covenant		< akeqe-(u)saq				akequsaq	akequsaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
akfigh-	frab4-	attach a strap to a bag															to attach a strap to a bag to use over the shoulder				CK Rub 49		akfigh-	akfigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1271 -\
aki	frb	equivalent		akinga \'91the other side of it, its equivalent, its value or price\'92	other side	price								money			equivalent; other side; price; money		PE aki(-)			akike-, akileghtugh-, akilpegagh-, akimigiaq, akimsuggiite-, akingite-, akiingqwaghte-, akiniigh-, akiqu-, akite-, akitukneghu-, akitutala, akituusaq	aki	aki	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \
aki-	frb-	reciprocate			retaliate												to reciprocate; to retaliate		PE aki(-)				aki-	aki-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 -\
akigh-	frb4-	support		akighaa \'91he supported it\'92 /	brace	prop up											to support; to brace; to prop up		PE akki3-				akigh-	akigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1271 -\
akiighqun	fr752ey	meteorite found on the ground		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined	
\f0\i0 crystal of some kind								?				meteorite found on the ground; crystal of some kind				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 142		akighqun	akxghqun	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
akiingqwaghte-	fr7321f5ns-	echo		akiingqwaghtuq \'91it echoed\'92 /													to echo		PE aki3u3- (under PE aki(-)) (?); < aki-?-				akingqwaghte-	akxngqwaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1251 \u1187 \u1179 \u1265 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akike-	frbrs-	sell		akikaa \'91he sold it, traded it\'92 /	trade (exchange)												to sell; to trade (exchange)		< aki-ke\super 1\nosupersub -			akikugh-	akike-	akike-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
akiknaq	frbryf2	wind that blows in the opposite direction			north-northeast wind 
\f2\i (St. Lawrence Island meaning)	
\f0\i0 southwest wind
\f2\i  (Chukotka meaning)											
\f0\i0 wind that blows in the opposite direction; north-northeast wind 
\f2\i (St. Lawrence Island meaning)
\f0\i0 ; southwest wind 
\f2\i (Chukotka meaning)	
\f0\i0 dtnth. pfledibq d ghjnbdjgjkj;ye/ cnjhjye			CK V & E 23;  C. Oozeva; Rub 39		akiknaq	akiknaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1082 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
akikugh-	frbre4-	sell		akikughtuq \'91he sold things\'92; akikughii \'91he sold them\'92 /													to sell		< akike-ugh-				akikugh-	akikugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 -\
akileghtugh-	frbks5ne4-	pay (give money to)		akileghtughaa \'91he paid her\'92 / Atagpek esghapagaqaaten enkaam 
\f2\i akileghtughllaqaaten
\f0\i0 . \'91Your Father watches you and will 
\f2\i reward
\f0\i0  you.\'92 (Matthew 6.4)	reward												to pay; to reward		< aki-?-			akileghtuusaq	akileghtugh-	akileghtugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
akileghtuusaq	frbks5n8cz2	pay (money or in kind)			wages	salary											pay; wages; salary		< akileghtugh-(u)saq				akileghtusaq	akileghtxsaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
akilghuu-, akilghuugh-	frbk48-. frbk484-	yell		akilghuuguq \'91he yelled\'92 akilghuugaa \'91he yelled at him\'92 / 
\f2\i sergeant
\f0\i0 -am akilghuumeng yuni pisqii sukalluki nengit mingllegtesqii \'91the sergeant yelled at his men to put their quarters in order\'92	scream	loud voice (use a ~)											to yell; to scream; to use a loud voice						akilghu-, akilghugh-	akilghx-, akilghxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1263 -, \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1263 \u1271 -\
akilguqe-	frbkue2s-	price high		yupiget kiyang sangwaa akilguqigataat \'91yupik people don\'92t always put a high price on things\'92; qikmighaghhaq piyuksaghaqa akilguqaa \'91I wanted to have the puppy, but he put a high price on it\'92	put a high price on something												to price high; to put a high price on something		< aki-lgu-ke- (?)		A&W 5		akilguqe-	akilguqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
akiliitaq	fr7kbnf2	rainjacket type used with kayak			kayak rainjacket												rainjacket type used with kayak				CK Rub 40		akilitaq	akilxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1251 \u1083 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
akilpegagh-	frbk]gsuf4-	shop (purchase)		akilpegaghtuq \'91he shopped\'92 / akilpegaatkaa \'91he shopped for it, used it for trading\'92	trade (exchange)												to shop; to engage in trading					akilpegaghvik	akilpegagh-	akilpegagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
akilpegaghvik	frbk]gsuf4dbr	store															store		< akilpegagh-vik				akilpegaghvik	akilpegaghvik	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
akimigaq	frbvbuf2	fifteen															fifteen		< aki-mik-ghaq				akimigaq	akimigaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
akimsuggiite-	frbvc/[7ns-	cheap (be very ~)															to be very cheap		< aki-msuggiite-				akimsuggite-	akimsuggxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akin	frby	pillow		= akita	slat at either side of sled												pillow; slat at either side of sled		PE akin (under PE aki(-)); < aki-(u)n				akin	akin	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \
akingite-	frb3bns-	cheap (be ~)			free (be ~)	inexpensive (be ~)											to be cheap; to be free; to be inexpensive		< aki-(ng)ite-				akingite-	akingite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akiniigh-	frby74-	objections (raise ~)			sass	retaliate								object (raise objections)			to raise objections; to sass; to retaliate		< aki-niigh-				akinigh-	akinxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
akiqagh-	frb2f4-	fend off (as with the hands) something that is coming at one		Salngagek qemtameng ifaghtekegket yugem 
\f2\i akiqaghyaqminikek
\f0\i0  llaaghanwha katagunneghituk. \'91When the man 
\f2\i fended off
\f0\i0  the box that the dropped from the attic, he kept it from spilling .\'92 (SULUWET 109)													to fend off (as with the hands) something that is coming at one						akiqagh-	akiqagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
akiqu-	frb2e-	sass back															to sass back		< aki-?-				akiqu-	akiqu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 -\
akisqaghtaan, akisqaghtaasiq	frbc2f5n6y. frbc2f5n6cb2	flashlight		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 akisqaghtaatek, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  akisqaghtaasik, 
\f2\i for one flashlight													
\f0\i0 flashlight		< akisqaghte-?-(u)n, akisqaghte-?-(u)siq				akisqaghtan, akisqaghtasiq	akisqaghtxn, akisqaghtxsiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1085 , \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
akisqaghte-	frbc2f5ns-	shine light		akisqaghtuq \'91it shined; akisqaghtaa \'91it shined on it\'92 / Mamlegmi yugem tumeni 
\f2\i akisqaghtaa
\f0\i0 . \'91The man 
\f2\i shined a light on
\f0\i0  his path.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 20)	flash light	reflect light											to shine light; to flash light; to reflect light					akisqaghtaasik, akisqaghun	akisqaghte-	akisqaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akisqaghun	frbc2f4ey	light source			mirror	reflection											light source; mirror; reflection		< akisqaghte-(u)n				akisqaghun	akisqaghun	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
akite-	frbns-	reciprocate		akitaa \'91he reciprocated toward her\'92 / akitaa aapsatni unaanguluku igleghnaqutni \'91he answered him when he asked if he were leaving early in the morning\'92; akitaa ilani tuyuusameng tuunyatni kameraaghegneng \'91he sent back a present in return for the rubber boots his friend had given him\'92	respond	answer								revenge (take ~)			to reciprocate; to respond; to answer; to take revenge		< aki-(u)te-				akite-	akite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Akitfak	Frbnafr	Powooiliak (site on coast north from ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on coast north from Powooiliak on St. Lawrence Is.						Akitfak	Akitfak	\uc0\u1040 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1092 \u1072 \u1082 \
Akitfawaaq	Frbnaf162	Powooiliak Bay at the west end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. (site on ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on Powooiliak Bay at the west end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.				CK		Akitfawaq	Akitfawxq	\uc0\u1040 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1092 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
akitukneghu-	frbnery]s4e-	stubborn (be ~)															to be stubborn		< aki-tu-?-neq\super ?\nosupersub -(ng)u- (?)				akitukneghu-	akitukneghu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 -\
akituqaq	frbne2f2	expensive thing															expensive thing	ljhjujq	< aki-tu-qaq		Rub. 43		akituqaq	akituqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
akitutala	frbnenfkz	price			cost	value (worth, cost, price)											price; cost; value		< aki-tu-tala				akitutala	akitutala	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
akitutaligh-	frbnenfkb4-	estimate cost or value															to estimate cost or value	jwtybdfnm xnj-k>	< akitutala-ligh-		Rub. 43		akitutaligh-	akitutaligh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
akituusaq	frbn8cz2	gift given in return for something			action, good or bad, done in reciprocation	answer								payback			gift given in return for something; an action (good or bad) done in reciprocation; answer; payback		< aki-tugh-(u)saq				akitusaq	akitxsaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
akivaq	frbdf2	southwest		akivaaghtaa \'91the wind turned toward the south\'92	south (far ~)												southwest; far south						akivaq	akivaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
akivigte-	frbdb[ns-	prop up skin boat on its side		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  akigh-; 
\f2\i reported also (in R) as 
\f0\i0 akevegte- \'91to turn over\'92													to prop up skin boat on its side		PE akivi!-				akivigte-	akivigte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aklegaq	frk]suf2	arrow used on birds															arrow used on birds		PE akl0!a3 (under PE ak03); < aklek-ghaq				aklegaq	aklegaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
aklek	frk]sr	barb of hook or harpoon tip		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 aklegek
\f2\i , for one barb or notch	
\f0\i0 notch in arrowhead												barb of hook or harpoon tip; notch in arrowhead						aklek	aklek	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \
aklighyaget	frk]b4mzusn	atmosphere (highest level of ~)		
\f2\i a plural	
\f0\i0 highest level of atmosphere												highest level of the atmosphere						aklighyaget	aklighyaget	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \
aklu-	frk]/-	need (be in ~)		akluuq \'91he needs something\'92 / aklukaa \'91he lacks it\'92; aklumalghii \'91one in need, poor person\'92; aklumrugnilnguq \'91one comfortably well off\'92	lack something												to be in need; to lack something		PE aklu-			aklunaq, aklungi	aklu-	aklu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 -\
akluma-	frk]/vf-	poor (be ~)		
\f2\i Aklumalleghpigaq
\f0\i0  Quyanalleghpigaq Kuusma \'91The 
\f2\i Poorest
\f0\i0  Most Thankful Christmas\'92 (KALLAG. 36); Uteghmun sumeghtaghaatkennemkun Kuusmelleghput nengllugutkullghiini qerngaaghhaamta, 
\f2\i aklumaghngaamta
\f0\i0 , kayutkuteqaghlluta. \'91When I think back (I realize) that we had Christmas being a family gathered together even though we were 
\f2\i poor
\f0\i0  helping each other.\'92 (KALLAG. 51); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  aklungi													to be poor						akluma-	akluma-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1072 -\
aklumalghii	frk]/vfk47	poor (poverty stricken) person		Ama kiyaghlleghhii aghnaq 
\f2\i aklumalghii
\f0\i0 , ugilek avaqutaghtuqaq, aatgha Arepaki. \'91And there lived a 
\f2\i poor
\f0\i0  woman, with a husband and lots of children, named Arepaki.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 25); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  aklungi													poor (poverty stricken) person		< akluma-lghii				aklumalghi	aklumalghx	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
aklunagh-	frk]/yf4-	rare (be ~)			scarce (be ~)												to be rare; to be scarce		< aklu-naq				aklunagh-	aklunagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aklunaq	frk]/yf2	scarcity (time of ~)			needed thing												time of scarcity; something needed		< aklu-naq				aklunaq	aklunaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
aklunghighi-	frk]/y4b4b-	rich (become ~)		aklunghighiiq \'91he became rich\'92 /	wealthy (beome ~)												to become rich; to become wealthy		< aklungi-?-				aklunghighi-	aklunghighi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 -\
aklungi	frk]/3b	wealth		aklunginga \'91his wealth\'92	riches												wealth; riches		< aklu-?-				aklungi	aklungi	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \
aklungite-	frk]/3bns-	wealthy (be ~)		aklungilnguq \'91wealthy person, place abounding in resources\'92	rich (be ~)												to be rich, wealthy		< aklungi-(u)te-				aklungite-	aklungite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akmaataq	frv]6nf2	rope or shoulder strap for shoulder load															rope or shoulder strap for shoulder load		< akmak-(u)taq\super 4		\nosupersub CK Rub 45		akmataq	akmxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
akmag-	frv]fu-	backpack (carry on back)		akmagtuq \'91he backpacked something\'92; akmagaa \'91he backpacked it, carried it on his back \'91/	carry on one\'92s back												to backpack; to carry on one\'92s back		PE natma!-			akmagtaq, akmagun, akmagutaq, akmaneghpalluq	akmag-	akmag-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1075 -\
akmagin	frv]fuby	strap of backpack															strap of backpack		< akmag-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)n				akmagin	akmagin	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \
akmagtaghraak	frv]f[nf4h6r	handbag															handbag		< akmagtaq-raak				akmagtaghrak	akmagtaghrxk	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
akmagtalek	frv]f[nfksr	fin whale		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E); exact identification undetermined	
\f0\i0 whale (fin ~)								species name?				fin whale				CK E & V 50		akmagtalek	akmagtalek	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
akmagtaq	frv]f[nf2	backpack															backpack		< akmag-taq\super 1\nosupersub  (?)			akmagtaghraak	akmagtaq	akmagtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
akmagun	frv]fuey	strap of backpack															strap of backpack		< akmag-(u)n				akmagun	akmagun	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
akmagutaq	frv]fuenf2	barrel		
\f2\i also used in the dual 
\f0\i0 akmagutak 
\f2\i for one barrel													
\f0\i0 barrel		< akmag-(u)taq\super 4				\nosupersub akmagutaq	akmagutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
akmak	frv]fr	backpack			pack	back load											backpack; pack; thing carried on back		PE natma!-				akmak	akmak	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1082 \
akmakuraq	frv]frehf2	spare rope or raincoat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);													
\f0\i0 spare rope or raincoat		< akmak-?		CK Rub 44		akmakuraq	akmakuraq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
akmaliighaq	frv]fk74f2	least auklet		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  akmak	auklet (least ~)	
\f2\i Aethia pusilla											
\f0\i0 least auklet (Aethia pusilla)						akmalighaq	akmalxghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
akmaneghpalluq	frv]fys5gfk]/2	camel		
\f2\i used in Bible translations for 
\f0\i0 \'91camel\'92	backload (one with a large ~)												camel; one with a large backload		< akmaneq-palluq				akmaneghpalluq	akmaneghpalluq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \
akmaneq	frv]fys2	load on back			back (thing on one\'92s ~)												load on back; thing on back		< akmag-neq\super ?				\nosupersub akmaneq	akmaneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
akneqaq	fry]s2f2	protrusion or projection to keep something from slipping		baseball bat-em iquga akneqalek peskugaghiitaq \'91a baseball bat\'92s end has something to keep it from slipping\'92; unaghsim akneqaa peskugaghiitaqluku angyam waapenga petugaa \'91the boat\'92s rope is fastened near the projection of the piece of wood lest it slip off\'92													protrusion or projection to keep something from slipping		+ PY akn0q \'91point\'92 (cf. Naukan Yupik ak%0q \'91point, extremity, sharp edge\'92)		A&W 6		akneqaq	akneqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
aksaqe-	frcz2s-	secret (keep a ~)		aksaqaa \'91he's keeping it a secret\'92 / aksaqiiq \'91he's keeping secrets\'92; aksaqegkaq \'91secrecy\'92; Aghnaghaghhaam 
\f2\i aksaqaa
\f0\i0  ungipaq aangelghii. \'91The little girl 
\f2\i kept secret
\f0\i0  the big news.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT.20); Atagpek liisimakaa 
\f2\i aksaqluku
\f0\i0  sallghen enkaam akileghtughlleqaaten. \'91Your Father knows 
\f2\i in secret 
\f0\i0 what you do and will reward you.\'92 (Matthew 6.6a)	hide something												to keep a secret; to hide something		PY atsaq0-				aksaqe-	aksaqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aksaqumtaaq	frcz2evn62	secret															secret		< aksaqe-qumtaaq				aksaqumtaq	aksaqumtxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
aksig-	frcbu-	paddle with an oar outward from the boat so as to make it turn		aksigaa \'91he turned it (boat)\'92 / aksigun \'91an oar used specifically for this purpose\'92; (?)													to paddle with an oar outward from the boat so as to make it turn						aksig-	aksig-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 -\
aksigu-	frcbue-	adjust the wick and flame in a seal oil lamp		aksiwaa \'91he adjusted it\'92 / aksigun \'91wick-adjusting device\'92													to adjust the wick and flame in a seal oil lamp						aksigu-	aksigu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 -\
akugaaq	freu62	days (several ~ ago)		
\f2\i particle:
\f0\i0  akugaaq ima kaasimalghii Sivungameng \'91he arrived several days ago from Savoonga\'92	yesterday	ago (several days ~)											several days ago; the other day; yesterday		PE ak(k)uva3				akugaq	akugxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 \
akughaghqagh-	fre4f52f4-	pick roots			roots (pick ~)												to pick roots		< akuq-?-				akughaghqagh-	akughaghqagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
akughaq	fre4f2	groin			plant root, edible, especially of mountain sorel (
\f2\i Oxria dignya
\f0\i0 )	sorel (mountain ~) root								
\f2\i Oxria dignya 
\f0\i0 (root)			groin; edible plant root, especially of mountain sorel (
\f2\i Oxria dignya
\f0\i0 )		< akuq-ghaq				akughaq	akughaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
akughqun	fre52ey	eaten (something to be ~)															something to be eaten				CK Rub 49		akughqun	akughqun	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
akughte-	fre5ns-	apply water		akughtaa \'91she put water in or on it\'92 / yugem akughtaak saguyagni anglanaghtesqellukek \'91the man moistened his drum skin to make it sound better\'92	mix seal oil and blood	dilute								soak			to apply water; to mix seal oil and blood; to dilute; to soak		PY-S aku3-\super 2				\nosupersub akughte-	akughte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akughtu-	fre5ne-	long or too long (of garments)		akughtuuq \'91it is (too) long\'92	long roots (have ~)												to be long or too long (of garments); to have long roots		< akuq-tu-				akughtu-	akughtu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 -\
akughtugh-	fre5ne4-	stretch one's hands or arms to reach		akughtughtuq \'91he stretched his arms out\'92; akughtughaa \'91he reached out to him\'92 / taghnughhaq akughtughtuq naaminun \'91the baby reached out to his mother\'92; taghnughhaam talligni akughtuutaak \'91the baby reached out its arms\'92	reach out												to stretch one's hands or arms to reach; to reach out						akughtugh-	akughtugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
akughun	fre4ey	dish filled with water that is used to moisten a drum															dish filled with water that is used to moisten a drum after a shaman\'92s seance		< akughte-(u)n		CK Rub 46		akughun	akughun	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
akughutaq	fre4enf2	Eskimo religous ceremony, old-time															an old-time Eskimo religous ceremony		< akughte-(u)taq		CK Rub 46		akughutaq	akughutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
akughvigaq*, akughvigasak	fre4dbuf2. fre4dbufczr	boot of shaved sealskin, knee-high, waterproof, and used for hunting															skin-boot of shaved sealskin, knee-high, waterproof, and used for hunting						akughvigaq*, akughvigasak	akughvigaq*, akughvigasak	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 , \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \

\f1\b akula\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub frekzs	space between things		akula qaamna wata kangsuuteghllaguuq eslalighneghmineng qerngughtaaghni quyngini taagani \'91the middle part of that herd of reindeer is more tightly bunched together than the part toward the outside of the herd\'92	middle	center								second float on whaling gear			midst; middle; center; space between things; middle (second) float on whaling gear		PE akul0- (under PE aku(3))		CK V & E 116 (akulangani)	akuliq, akulkestaaghhaq, akulkestaalleq, akulqusuk, akultu-, akultughte-, akullghute-, akulghaaghet, akulangani	akulae	akulae	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
akulghaaghet	frek464sn	armor of walrus hide with baleen and ivory fittings															walrus hide armor with baleen and ivory fittings; place name on St. Lawrence Island		< akula-?-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 akulghaghet	akulghxghet	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \
akuliite-	frek7ns-	position in the midst		aghnaghaghhaq akuliituq angayuqaghmikun qenwat \'91the little girl finally positioned herself between her parents\'92	place in the midst	infiltrate								mix in			to position or place in the midst; to infiltrate; to mix in		< akuliq-(u)te-				akulite-	akulxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akuliq	frekb2	middle		akuliqaq \'91something that has a middle or center part added to it\'92; nekevuutngalghiini 
\f2\i akuliq
\f0\i0  mekelghiiq angvigalqaat. \'91Of the ones standing the boy 
\f2\i in the middle
\f0\i0  is the biggest one of them.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 22)	center	core								part in between			middle; center; core; part in between		< akula-?-				akuliq	akuliq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
Akulkek	Fr/k]rsr	Akeftapak (site at point north and west of ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site at point north and west of Akeftapak on St. Lawrence Is.		< akula\super e				\nosupersub Akulkek	Akulkek	\uc0\u1040 \u1082 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1099 \u1082 \
akulkestaaghhaq*	frek]rscn65f2	narrow thing		akulkestaaghhaaguq \'91it is narrow, frequent\'92	frequent occurrence												narrow thing; frequent occurrence		< akula-staaghhaq				akulkestaghhaq*	akulkestxghhaq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
akulkestaalleq	frek]rscn6k]s2	narrowest part			crowded (most ~ part)												narrowest part; most crowded part		< akula-staaq-lleq				akulkestalleq	akulkestxlleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
akullghute-	frek]5ens-	mix or become mixed into a crowd or mass		
\f2\i often of people, with the implication that it is done stealthily
\f0\i0 ; yulghutnun akullghusalghiimi ima aga puygunginaamaan aglalleghqani tukughminun \'91when he got into the midst of the crowd of people he quickly forgot that he was supposed to return to the family he was staying with\'92; naten kii, akullghullaataghta mekelghiiq, legan wiin anaavagyaghtesnaniqaghput unaaq anuqmeng apalluqlu? \'91how did that boy leave our midst to go hunting for birds with a net after we told him not to go this morning on account of the strong wind?\'92													to mix or become mixed into a crowd or mass		< akula-?-				akullghute-	akullghute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akullute-	frek]/ns-	jumble things		nekeghqughwaaqat akullusaqunaki taakut \'91don\'92t jumble the things that are neatly arranged\'92	mix things up												to jumble things; to mix things up		< akula-?-(u)te-		A&W 6		akullute-	akullute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akulpeghte-	frek]gs5ns-	add something in the middle		tapghaq sakeqsiqaq akulpeghtaghlluku atughaghput \'91we used it in the middle repairing the worn rope\'92; negaghpak akulpeghlluku qukaakun pinilghiimeng simighaqa \'91I exchanged it with a good section putting it in as the middle part of the gilnet\'92													to add something in the middle		< akulpeq-?		VK		akulpeghte-	akulpeghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akulpeq	frek]gs2	middle (something added in the ~)											check				something added in the middle		< akula-?		A&W 6		akulpeq	akulpeq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \
akulqusuk	frek]2ec/r	crack between boards or rocks															crack between boards or rocks		PY akulqucuk (under PE aku(3)); < akula-?-				akulqusuk	akulqusuk	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
akultu-	frek]ne-	far apart (be ~)		akultuut \'91they are widely spaced \'91/ iiskek akultupigtak taam aghnam \'91that woman's eyes are far apart\'92	widely spaced (be ~)												to be far apart; to be widely spaced		PE akultu- (under PE aku(3)); < akula-tu-				akultu-	akultu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 -\
akultughte-	frek]ne5ns-	further apart (become ~)		akultughtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  akultughtaa \'91it has become less frequent, less crowded, etc.\'92 / qiighwlleghqek akultughtaak \'91his coughing spells are becoming less frequent\'92; tuqlughillgha wata akultughtaa \'91he is calling less frequently now\'92	less frequent or crowded (become ~)												to become farther apart, less frequent, or less crowded		< akultu-?-				akultughte-	akultughte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b akuma\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub frevf\super s	\nosupersub granulated sugar		
\f2\i direct nominalization of 
\f0\i0 akume-; 
\f2\i Akuma
\f0\i0  tagivaghhu. \'91Pass 
\f2\i the sugar
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 23)	sugar, granulated												granulated sugar						akumae	akumae	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
akume-	frevs-	put sugar or other things in		akumaa \'91he put sugar (or something else) in it\'92 / akumutuq \'91he mingled with the others or put in something for himself\'92; akumutaa \'91he put it into something\'92	add extra ingredients	sugar (put ~ or other things in)											to put sugar or other things in; to add extra ingredients						akume-	akume-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 -\
akumighaghtagh-	frevb4f5nf4-	interrupt other\'92s talking		aleghquullghiini wiin akumighaghtaghtuten nepiiqaa \'91please be quiet; you\'92ve interrupted the conversation\'92									check				to interrupt other\'92s talking		< akume-?-		A&W 6		akumighaghtagh-	akumighaghtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
akumkaghqaq	frevrf52f2	ingredient to be added		Sangisiin 
\f2\i akumkaghqameng
\f0\i0  piinsuukemun? \'91Don\'92t you have 
\f2\i anything to add
\f0\i0  to the beans?\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 23)													ingredient to be added		< akume-kaghqaq				akumkaghqaq	akumkaghqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
akuq	fre2	root of plant		akwaa \'91its root\'92													root of plant		PE aku(3)			akughaghqagh-, akughaq, akughtu-	akuq	akuq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \
akuqagh-	fre2f4-	grab		akuqaghaa \'91he grabbed it\'92 /	catch	accept a decision or an offer quickly											to grab; catch; to accept a decision or an offer quickly		PE aku3-\super 1				\nosupersub akuqagh-	akuqagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
akusqaghtaq	frec2f5nf2	rumor			news told before it becomes certain												rumor; news told before it becomes certain		< akusqaghte-aq				akusqaghtaq	akusqaghtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
akusqaghte-	frec2f5ns-	spread a rumor or news before it becomes certain		
\f2\i Akusqaghtaghtut
\f0\i0  un\'92ga kinkut angyiit aghvengniluki. \'91They 
\f2\i are quickly spreading the word
\f0\i0  that someone\'92s boat out there has caught a whale.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 23)													to spread a rumor or news before it becomes certain		< akuzi-qaghte-				akusqaghte-	akusqaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akuuraate-	fr8h6ns-	be there when something happens		akuuraatuq \'91he was there at the right time\'92; akuuraataa \'91he brought it on time\'92 / akuuraatuq Neghestikun maapiluni \'91he arrived just in time for Thanksgiving\'92	arrive on time	right place at the right time (be in the ~)											to be there when something happens; to arrive on time; to be in the right place at the right time		< akuragh-(u)te-				akurate-	akxrxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1263 \u1088 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akuuragh-	fr8hf4-	same place or same time (be at the ~)		
\f2\i exact meaning/use questioned; 
\f0\i0 akuuraqwaaquuq \'91he always seems to be hunting in the right place at the right time and catches something\'92													to be at the same place or same time						akuragh-	akxragh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1263 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
akuutaq	fr8nf2	dough			mixture	baked item of food								Eskimo \'93ice cream\'94			dough; mixture; baked item of food; Eskimo "ice cream"		PE akuta3 (under PE aku(3)); < akuute-aq				akutaq	akxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
akuute-	fr8ns-	mix		akuutuq \'91he is mixing something; akuutaa \'91he is mixing it\'92 /	knead												to mix; to knead		PE akut- (under PE aku(3)); < aku-?-			akuutaq	akute-	akxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akuynaq	freqyf2	time when people are in a hurry		akuynaq pivagilgan estugaghmun akilpegaghyaghnaqunga \'91before it gets really busy I\'92m going to go shop at the store\'92; akuynami sangwaa puyguyaqunaan \'91don\'92t forget something during the rush\'92	hurry (time when people are in a ~)	rush								rush hour			time when people are in a hurry; rush; rush hour		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  PE akut- (under PE aku(3))		A&W 7		akuynaq	akuynaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1253 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
akuzi-	frepb-	speak		akuziiq \'91he spoke /													to speak		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  PE akut- (under PE aku(3))			akusqaghtaq, akuzil;leq, akuzimleghagh-, akuzin, akuzipik	akuzi-	akuzi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1079 \u1080 -\
akuzilleq	frepbk]s2	word		Aghnaghaam 
\f2\i akuzillgha
\f0\i0  whangkunneng allanguuq. \'91The girl\'92s 
\f2\i speech
\f0\i0  is different from ours.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 24)	speech (manner of ~)												word; manner of speech		< akuzi-lleq				akuzilleq	akuzilleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
akuzilqusiigh-	frepbk]2ec74-	sharp remarks (make ~)															to make sharp remarks	ujdjhbnm rjkrjcnb	< akuzi-lqusiq-ligh-		Rub. 46		akuzilqusigh-	akuzilqusxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
akuzimleghagh-	frepbvks4f4-	whisper		akuzimleghaghtuq \'91he whispered\'92 /													to whisper		< akuzi-vleghagh-				akuzimleghagh-	akuzimleghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
akuzin	frepby	word		Piinlighyuwhaalleghmeng 
\f2\i Akuzin
\f0\i0  tawantekaq, \'85 \'91 In the beginning was the 
\f2\i Word
\f0\i0 , \'85\'92 (John 1.1)													word		< akuzi-(u)n				akuzin	akuzin	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1085 \
akuzipig-	frepbgbu-	speak Yupik		akuzipigtuq \'91he spoke in the St. Lawrence Is. / Siberian Yupik Eskimo language\'92	Yupik (speak ~)												to speak Yupik		< akuzi-pik				akuzipig-	akuzipig-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 -\
akuzipik	frepbgbr	Yupik (St. Lawrence Is./ Siberian) Eskimo language		akuzipigestun \'91in the St. Lawrence Is. / Siberian Yupik Eskimo language\'92	St. Lawrence Is. / Siberian Yupik Eskimo language	Eskimo (St. Lawrence Is. / Siberian Yupik) language								Siberian / St. Lawrence Is. Yupik Eskimo language			the St. Lawrence Is. / Siberian Yupik Eskimo language		< akuzi-pik				akuzipik	akuzipik	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
akuzite-	frepbns-	advise		akuzitaa \'91he is advising him\'92 /	urge	persuade (try to ~)											to advise; to urge; to try to persuade		< akuzi-(u)te-				akuzite-	akuzite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
akuziviighqe-	frepbd752f2s-	scold without good reason		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to scold without good reason	heufnm yfghfcyj rjuj-k>	< akuzi-(u)te-		Rub. 46		akuzivighqe-	akuzivxghqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
akuziyiilnguq	frepbq7k3e2	speechless person		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 mute person												speechless person; mute person	,tcckjdtcysq. ytvjq	< akuzi-yiite-nguq		Rub. 46		akuziyilnguq	akuziyxlnguq	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1253 \u1251 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
akwaangigh-	fr[163b4-	increase in volume or number or frequency		akwaangightuq \'91it is become more numerous or frequent\'92 / tepam tepellgha akwaangighyalghiimi esnighqwat tepaghsilghutut \'91when more and more sea life got washed ashore the beachcombers got their fill of sea life\'92; qawaagem tagillgha akwaangightuq \'91the arrival of birds is becoming more frequent\'92													to increase in volume or number or frequency				A&W 7		akwangigh-	akwxngigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1082 \u1093 \u1265 \u257 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
alaaqitke-	fk92bnrs-	get something and then lose it right away		alaaqitkaa \'91he got it and then lost it\'92 / unangkaghteng tugungwaaghluku alaaqitkaat \'91they retrieved the seal they killed but then they lost it\'92													to get something and then lose it right away				VK		alaqitke-	alxqitke-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
alaghrang	fkz4hf3	also		
\f2\i particle; shows the insistence on something or the continued existence of certain circumstances
\f0\i0 ; siivanlleghita qelghii aatkani kinengllaghaghtesqelluki, alaghrang gaaghaghutqaghtesqumaghmi piiq \'91their elder implored them to dry his clothes and also he begged them to cook for him right away\'92; tengegkayuget wiintakusikat alaghrang aviitut \'91the airplane that was delayed never did come\'92; alaghrang piyaafqaama, anuqa iknaqataghapigta wiin \'91I might as well not go because the wind is a little too strong\'92; \'91Ighennaq 
\f2\i alaghrang
\f0\i0  aghulangigateftuq kayagtaghwaaghyaghaghput pipagningitngwaaghtuq. \'91Ighennaq, 
\f2\i it turns out
\f0\i0 , doesn\'92t dance. We tried having him dance, but he wouldn\'92t at all.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:132)	furthermore	turns out (it ~)								might as well			furthermore; also; might as well; it turns out		from Chukchi ar\'92ala \'91perfectly, at all, very\'92 ?				alaghrang	alaghrang	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1187 \
alaghuutaghte-	fkz48nf5ns-	premonition (have a ~)		sameng alaghuutaghsigasiin? \'91haven\'92t you been expecting something to happen?\'92; sangwaat alaghuutaghsigatut \'91nothing was sensed, expected\'92	expect something to happen								check this further -- don\'92t totally understand it				to have a premonition; to expect something to happen				A&W 7		alaghutaghte-	alaghxtaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
alagyipa	fkzuqbgf	pie made from reindeer fat and chopped boiled meat		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 a pie made from reindeer fat and chopped boiled meat		from Chukchi ala!yipa \'91to cook the insides of reindeer feet in reindeer tallow letting the result to jell\'92		CK Rub 61; Tanko and Tepegkaq		alagyipa	alagyipa	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1253 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \
alaka	fkzrf	spirit that takes the form of a killer whale															spirit that takes the form of a killer whale						alaka	alaka	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \

\f1\b alamka\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fkzvrf\super s	\nosupersub partition between compartments of a ruminant's stomach															partition between compartments of a ruminant's stomach						alamkae	alamkae	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1099 \
alamsa-	fkzvcz-	eat more (want to ~)		alamsaaq \'91he wants to eat more\'92 / neghepanghitem entaqun alamsaghllaguuq \'91he wants to eat more perhaps on account of not having eaten much\'92									check				to want to eat more				A&W 7		alamsa-	alamsa-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 -\
alangghu-	fkz34e-	missing something		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  alangghuyugtuq \'91he misses something, he is feeling a loss\'92; alangghukaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  alangghuyukaa \'91he feels its loss, feels that he didn't have enough time with it\'92; asagan mekelghiighhaq tuqulghii elngaatall alangghuyukaa qevuulluku \'91the aunt of the boy who just died is bemoaning the shortness of his life\'92	loss (at a ~)												missing something; at a loss		PE ala&3u- (?)				alangghu-	alangghu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 -\
alangqughiitaq	fkz32e47nf2	ring															ring		< alangquq-iitaq				alangqughitaq	alangqughxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
alangquq	fkz32e2	ring finger		alangqghwa \'91his ring finger\'92	finger (ring ~)												ring finger		cf. PE ak9anqu3			alangqughiitaq	alangquq	alangquq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
alaqitke-	fkz2bnrs-	lose game right after catching it		alaqitkaa \'91he got it and lost it soon after\'92/ unangkaghteng tugungwaaghluku alaqitkaat \'91after taking hold of the seal they\'92d caught, they lost it\'92; alaqitkesaqunaan tugunaqiteggu \'91try to bring it in without losing it\'92; a 
\f2\i in the second syllable is also reported as long									
\f0\i0 check length of a; it\'92s written both long and short				to lose game right after catching it				A&W 7		alaqitke-	alaqitke-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
alayulgen	fkz/kusy	commode		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 commode		from Chukchi alayol!0n \'91(?)\'92		CK Rub 61		alayulgen	alayulgen	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1102 \u1083 \u1075 \u1099 \u1085 \
alefa	fksaf	elephant		
\f2\i Chukotkan; St. Lawrence Islanders use 
\f0\i0 kamagraq
\f2\i  for this;  the elephant is known only through contact with outsiders													
\f0\i0 elephant		from English \'91elephant\'92	Chuk.	V&E59; R60		alefa	alefa	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1092 \u1072 \
aleghqugh- 	fks52e4-	speak to someone		aleghqughtuq \'91he spoke to someone\'92; aleghqughaa \'91he spoke to him, giving him advice\'92 / aleghquutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  conversed\'92	advise												to speak to someone; to advise		PE al03qu3-			aleghqumseghagh-, aleghqumsug-, aleghquusiq	aleghqugh- 	aleghqugh- 	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
aleghquma-	fks52evf-	stay with a companion			company (keep ~)												to stay with a companion; to keep company		< aleq-?-(i/u)ma-				aleghquma-	aleghquma-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 -\
aleghqumseghagh-	fks52evcs4f4-	whisper		aleghqumseghaghtuq \'91he whispered\'92; aleghqumseghaghaa \'91he whispered to her\'92 /	joke	tease								speak lightly			to whisper; to joke; to tease; to speak lightly (in any sense)		< aleghqugh-vleghagh-				aleghqumseghagh-	aleghqumseghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aleghqumsug-	fks52evc/u-	chat			gossip												to chat; to gossip		< aleghqugh-msug-				aleghqumsug-	aleghqumsug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
aleghquusiq	fks528cb2	telephone		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 aleghquusik,
\f2\i  for one such device	
\f0\i0 citizen\'92s band radio	CB								radio, two way			telephone; CB; two-way radio		< aleghqugh-(u)siq				aleghqusiq	aleghqxsiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
alemeng	fksvs3	but		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  angyaghnguq tengsimaa, alemeng petugteghwaaqaayaghtuq \'91it (the wind) blew the boat away but then it seemed that it had been securely tied up\'92; alemeng amiklu sanighyiqaqsaghaqa naqamqun qelpanniit \'91they said it was open but contrary to what had been said I had locked the door\'92; \'93Mekelghiighmi ugani, hiik, aanestaaten aghnaghaam.\'94 \'93Aa, aanestanga.\'94 \'93Kii, 
\f2\i alemeng
\f0\i0  nengaakegkanka taglaanneghminiki aanesigatii.  Taawa ellnganitaqut.  Allallu aanesigatii.\'94 \'91\'93You boy (by the door), wow, the woman let you out?\'94 \'93Yes, she let me out.\'94 \'93Wow, 
\f2\i in
\f0\i0  
\f2\i contrast to that,
\f0\i0  she doesn't let my sons-in-law out when she brings them home. They stay with her. They don\'92t go out anymore.\'94\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. III:12)	on the contrary	contrary to what has been said											but; on the contrary; contrary to what has been said		from Chukchi \'91al0m0& \'91you see, in spite of, although, anyway\'92		A&W 7		alemeng	alemeng	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \
aleq	fks2	companion		aallgha \'91his companion\'92 
\f2\i (note the irregular voicelessness of 
\f0\i0 llgh); aallgha igaasim pigu \'91you can have the other pencil\'92; aallghituq \'91it doesn\'92t have a mate\'92; alelguuq \'91he has a companion\'92	other of a pair	second one								afterbirth			companion; other of a pair; second one; afterbirth		PE al03			aleghquma-,  alghapak, aalghaq, alghigh-, aallngunaan, aalqullghiik, Aallgha aghneq	aleq	aleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
alevegh-	fksds4-	want more food		aleveghtuq \'91he wants more food\'92; aleveghnaqlaataghtuten neqeput palapiguut \'91you\'92re wanting more again and  our food isn\'92t so plentiful\'92; neqmeng nuughtem alevghuteghllaguut \'91on account of the shortage of food everyone wants more\'92									check; given as aleveghta, glossed as wata ilamghi				to want more food				A&W 7		alevegh-	alevegh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 -\
aleveghte-	fksds5ns-	want more		aleveghtuq \'91he wants more\'92 / neqmeng nuughtem aleveghtut \'91because of the food shortage they want more\'92	more (want ~)												to want more				VK\'92s notes		aleveghte-	aleveghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
alghapaghagh-	fk4fgf4f4-	walk side by side with (him)		alghapaghaghaa \'91he walked side by side with him\'92 / 													to walk side by side with (him)		PY al3apak (under PE al03)		VK		alghapaghagh-	alghapaghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
alghapagti-	fk4fgf[nb-	walk side by side			side by side (walk ~)												to walk side by side		< alghapak-?-				alghapagti-	alghapagti-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 -\
alghapak	fk4fgfr	companion			partner	second wife								wife (second ~)			companion; partner; second wife		PY al3apak (under PE al03); < aleq-?-				alghapak	alghapak	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
algharengriiq	fk4fhs3h72	caterpillar (beach ~)			beach caterpillar												beach caterpillar						algharengriq	algharengrxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1088 \u1099 \u1187 \u1088 \u1251 \u1179 \
alghigh-	fk4b4-	repeat		alghightuq \'91he doing it for a second time\'92; alghighaa \'91he added a second one to it \'91/ alghightuq qayumeng \'91he had a second cup of tea\'92; Sivungaghhnaqelghii laluramka alghighaa yugem \'91the man is accompanying the white person going to Savoonga\'92	do for a second time	accompany											to repeat; to do for a second time; to accompany	ltkfnm dnjhbxyj	< aleq-ligh-		CK V & E 133 (Russ Voc)		alghigh-	alghigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
alguma-	fkuevf-	covet something		algumaaq \'91he covets something \'91/	want more (food or the like)												to covet something; to want more (food or the like)		PY-S al!u-			algumake-	alguma-	alguma-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 -\
algumake-	fkuevfrs-	covet		algumakaa \'91he covets it\'92 /													to covet		< alguma-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				algumake-	algumake-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
ali-	fkb-	out of sight		
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > aliigh-, aliighte-, aliinaghlluk, aliiqaqu-, aliite-													out of sight						ali-	ali-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 -\
aliftugh-	fkbane4-	miscarry		nulighha aliftughtuq maalghugegneng \'91his wife miscarried twice\'92													to miscarry						aliftugh-	aliftugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1092 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
aliga- 	fkbuf-	long to go somewhere or to see someone		aligaaq \'91he longs to go\'92 / aligavikegkaq \'91a longed-for person\'92													to long to go somewhere or to see someone					aligake-, aligate-	aliga- 	aliga- 	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 -\
aligake-	fkbufrs-	long to go to		aligakaa \'91he longs to go to him or it\'92													to long to go to		< aliga-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				aligake-	aligake-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
aligate-	fkbufns-	wish strongly to go		aligataqsaghtunga iitek esghaghyaghtughnalusi \'91I am longing to go and see you all\'92; aligallghii maligunnaluni qenwat aangghaghput \'91she was determined to go so we acquiesced\'92									?				to strongly wish to go		< aliga-?				aligate-	aligate-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aligavike-	fkbufdbrs-	long to go to		aligavikaa \'91he longs to go to him or it\'92													to long to go to		< aliga-vike-				aligavike-	aligavike-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
alignagh-	fkbuyf4-	powers (have shamanistic ~)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 alinge-	shaman (be a ~)								~ alignaq; > alignalghii				to have shamanistic power; to be a shaman						alignagh-	alignagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
alignaghtaagh-	fkbuyf5n64-	shamanism (perform supernatural acts through ~)		alignalghiit ilagaghluteng alignaghtaaghusimalghiit \'91the shamans performed their supernatural acts singing their songs\'92	supernatural (perform ~ acts through shamanism)												to perform supernatural acts through shamanism		< alignagh-?		Akiingqwaghneghet 114		alignaghtagh-	alignaghtxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
alignaghtagh-	fkbuyf5nf4-	shamanistic (have ~ powers)			powers (have shamanistic ~)												to have shamanistic powers		< alignaq-tagh\super 3\nosupersub -				alignaghtagh-	alignaghtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
alignalghii	fkbuyfk47	shaman		alignaghtaaghusiq \'91shaman's apparatus\'92													shaman		< alignagh-lghii				alignalghi	alignalghx	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
alignaq	fkbuyf2	shaman\'92s power		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 alinge-	power, shaman\'92s												shaman's power						alignaq	alignaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
aliigh-	fk74-	appear		aliightuq 
\f2\i or 
\f0\i0 aliighaa \'91it cleared up\'92 /	clear up (of weather)								< ali-(ng)igh-				to appear; for weather to clear up		PE alla3(i3)-				aligh-	alxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
aliighagh-	fk74f4-	keep one's hands inside parka sleeves			hands (keep one\'92s ~ inside parka sleeves)												to keep one's hands inside his parka sleeves		< aliq-?-				alighagh-	alxghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aliighte-	fk75ns-	reveal		aliightaa \'91he brought it into view\'92 / 	show	bring into view											to reveal; to show; to bring into view		< ali-?-				alighte-	alxghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aliilleq	fk7k]s2	birthday		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 birthday	ltym hj;ltybz	< aliigh-lleq		CK V & E 92		alilleq	alxlleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aliineghlluk	fk7ys5k]/r	clear weather			weather (clear ~)												clear weather		< aliite-neghlluk				alineghlluk	alxneghlluk	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
aliineq	fk7ys2	clear day		aliinghunani \'91whenever it was a calm day\'92	calm day												clear, calm day		< aliigh-neq\super 1 \nosupersub (?)				alineq	alxneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aliiqaqu-	fk72f2e-	intermittently visible or audible (be ~)		qagim eftii aliiqaquut \'91the sound of the waves can be heard now and then\'92	weather (be intermittently clear)												to be intermittently visible or audible; for weather to be intermittently clear		< ali-?-				aliqaqu-	alxqaqu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
aliisigate-	fk7cbufns-	invisible (be ~)		ilagalghiit ritigugni aliisigatut \'91the singers on the radio can't be heard\'92	inaudible (be ~)												to be invisible; to be inaudible		< aliite-(ng)igate-				alisigate-	alxsigate-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aliite-	fk7ns-	visible (be ~)			audible (be ~)												to be visible; to be audible		PY-S ala3it0- (under PE alla3(i3)-); < ali-(ng)ite-				alite-	alxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
alike-	fkbrs-	afraid (be ~ of (him/it))		alikaa \'91he is afraid of him or it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 alinge-, alikumtaaq	fear												to be afraid of (him/it); to fear		PE alik0-				alike-	alike-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
alikumtaaq	fkbrevn62	feared thing		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  alike-													something that is very much feared		< ?-qumtaaq				alikumtaq	alikumtxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
alinge-	fkb3s-	afraid (be ~)		alinguq \'91he is afraid\'92 / aghnaghaghhaam piigyamigu kaviighem amiraa pinilleghpigaq atama pinga elngaatall alingumalghii sumeghtaghaamalghii \'91when the girl tore her father's best fox skin she became very scared and worried\'92; \'91mekelghiighhaq alingluni yullunaaghllagmeng movie-yaghvigmi anqaghsimalghii the little boy got scared of the monster in the movie and ran out\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  alike-	scared (be ~)												to be afraid; be scared		PY ali&0-			alingnaq, alingite-, alingruugh-, alingseghagh-, alingtagh-, alingugughagh-, alingyugt-, alingughyug-, alingutke-	alinge-	alinge-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1099 -\
alingengite-	fkb3s3bns-	fearless (be ~)		alingengituq \'91he\'92s not afraid\'92 /													to be fearless		< alinge-(ng)ite-				alingengite-	alingengite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
alingnagh-	fkb3yf4-	frightening (be ~)		alingnaghtuq \'91it is frightening\'92 / kallugek alingnaghtuk aanglutek leveklugtalleghqek \'91thunder is frightening when its clap is exceptionally loud\'92; umiilek taana alingnapigtuq \'91that important person is intimidating\'92	intimidating (be ~)												to be frightening; to be intimidating		< aling-nagh-				alingnagh-	alingnagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
alingnaghhalek	fkb3yf5fksr	how scarey!		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 scarey (how ~!)												how scarey!		< alingnaq-ghhalek				alingnaghhalek	alingnaghhalek	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
alingnaq	fkb3yf2	frightening thing			scary thing	intimidating person											frightening thing; scary thing; intimidating person		< alinge-naq				alingnaq	alingnaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
alingruugh-	fkb3h84-	terrified (be~)		elngaatall alingruughtunga kumaghyan mangteghaghput \'91I was in a panic when our house caught fire\'92	panic												to be terrified; to panic		< alinge-?-				alingrugh-	alingrxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1088 \u1263 \u1271 -\
alingseghagh-	fkb3cs4f4-	scare (try to ~)		
\f2\i often with the implication of "teaching a lesson";
\f0\i0  alingseghaghtuq \'91he frightened someone\'92; alingseghaghaa \'91he frightened him\'92 / anengaan mekelghiighhaq alingseghaghaa gginaqwaalluugmeng \'91his older brother frightened the child with a scary mask\'92; nanevgam alingseghaghaa eltughani yakughnameng sikuk pilgulleghqaanayukayek piyaanaqeghllak \'91the old man tried to dissuade his grandson when he wanted to go out hunting by warning him of the possible danger of the sea ice\'92	frighten purposely												to try to scare; to purposely frighten		< alinge-?-				alingseghagh-	alingseghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
alingsequ-	fkb3cs2e-	gesture threateningly		qikmiq alingsequluku unaghsimeng qimagtestaa \'91he threatened the dog with a stick so it ran off\'92													to make a threatening gesture		< alinge-?-		VK		alingsequ-	alingsequ-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1089 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 -\
alingtagh-	fkb3nf4-	cowardly (be ~)		alingtaghtuq \'91he is habitually fearful\'92 / alingtalghii \'91coward, one who is habitually or excessively fearful or anxious\'92	fearful (be habitually ~)	cautious (be unduly ~)											to be cowardly; to be habitually fearful; to be unduly cautious		< alinge-tagh\super 3\nosupersub -			alingtasak, alingtiiritaq	alingtagh-	alingtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
alingtasak	fkb3nfczr	coward															coward		< alingtagh-?-				alingtasak	alingtasak	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
alingtiiritaq	fkb3n7hbnf2	amulet			charm (good luck ~)	charm put near entrance of house to protect inhabitants											amulet; good luck charm; charm put near entrance of house to protect  inhabitants		< alingtagh-?-				alingtiritaq	alingtxritaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1090 \u1251 \u1088 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
alingughagh-	fkb3e4f4-	wince		aghnalqwaaq ifkavzightuq alingughaghluni mekelghiighham kagsagtevzighyatni uziftameng tapghaaghpawaalegmeng \'91the little old woman almost fell from her chair when she flinched because of the boy's stringed twirler toy\'92	flinch												to wince; to flinch		< alinge-ugh-?-				alingughagh-	alingughagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
alingughyug-	fkb3e4m/u-	cower		alingughyugluni yaywaalingiighhaq aaptineghmeng neghyaghqameng aqumtaaghumalghii aghnelqusiq eslami \'91too timid to ask for something to eat, the poor little orphan sat outside all day long\'92	timid (be ~)												to cower; to be timid		< alinge-ugh-yug-				alingughyug-	alingughyug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
alingutke-	fkb3enrs-	concerned (be ~ about)		alingutkaa \'91he is worried about it or him\'92 / itegaqa puuvaatalghii qenwat alingutkaqa \'91I'm worried about my foot because it keeps swelling\'92	worry about												to be concerned about; to worry about		< alinge-(u)tke-				alingutke-	alingutke-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
alingyug-	fkb3m/u-	fearful (be ~)		
\f2\i often of darkness or of being alone; 
\f0\i0 mekelghiighhaq alingyugumalghii ellnginaghhaaghsami mangteghami unugumaan \'91the little boy became apprehensive when he was left alone in the house as evening's darkness fell\'92	apprehensive (be ~)												to be fearful or apprehensive		< alinge-yug-				alingyug-	alingyug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
aliq	fkb2	sleeve			lean-to storage room on side of house												sleeve; lean-to storage room on side of house		PE a9i3				aliq	aliq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
alitaan	fkbn6y	trim, fur, on sleeve of parka															fur trim on sleeve of parka		< aliq-?-(u)n				alitan	alitxn	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1085 \
alkuuqaq	fk]r82f2	extension of hallway part of roof of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 extension of hallway part of roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)				CK Rub 62		alkuqaq	alkxqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1263 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
alkwaagh-	fk]r164-	cover (by a large number or mass of objects)		
\f2\i perhaps specifically of an area covered by  birds, fish, etc.
\f0\i0 ; iqallugameng uga esnaq aklwaaghluni ayuquq \'91it seems like the beach down there is partially covered by all the tom-cod\'92; sukilpaq kiwani naayghami nalupiggneghmini repall uyghaget alkwaaghluki \'91sometimes where there are so many auklets on the north side of the mountain they practically cover a large area of rock\'92	covered (be ~) (by a large number or mass of objects)								check; glossed as saapevzighluni, but the examples make it sound like only a specific sort of covering				to cover or be covered (by a large number or mass of objects)				A&W 8, VK		alkwagh-	alkwxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
alkwaaq	fk]r162	mass of objects covering an area															mass of objects covering an area						alkwaq	alkwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
alla	fk]z	other thing		allanguuq \'91it is different\'92; allastun \'91in a different way\'92; 
\f2\i also a particle: 
\f0\i0 alla tuuninga tamaaken \'91give me more of that kind\'92; alla piltung \'91let's do it again\'92	different thing	more								again			other thing; different thing; more; again		PE atla			allaghlluggaq, allaghqi-, allaghquute-, allaghte-, allakagh-, allake-, allanqik, allakaghtaq, allayug-	alla	alla	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
allaaghlluggaq*	fk]95k]/[f2	magic			mystery	miracle							check; cf. allaghlluwha -- the same? yes, the other is deleted CK 	unusual and attractive thing			magic; mystery; miracle; unusual and attractive thing		< alla-?-lluggaq				allaghlluggaq*	allxghlluggaq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
allaghhiinaq	fk]z57yf2	all different kinds		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  Iyataamaghpek kiyaghtegpenang; neghaqi. Neqa 
\f2\i allaghhiinaq
\f0\i0   uglapigtuq. \'91Don\'92t stay hungry; eat!. Food 
\f2\i of all different kinds 
\f0\i0 is plentiful.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 72)	various kinds												of all different kinds; of various kinds		< alla-ghhaq-(ng)inaq				allaghhinaq	allaghhxnaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
allaghqi-	fk]z52b-	mistake (make a ~)			err	unexpected (say or do something ~)											to make a mistake; to err; to say or do something unexpected		< alla-?-				allaghqi-	allaghqi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 -\
allaghquute-	fk]z528ns-	miss hitting the spot aimed at;			arrive earlier or later than planned												to miss hitting the spot aimed at; to arrive earlier or later than planned		< alla-ghquute-				allaghqute-	allaghqxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
allakaayaq	fk]zr6z2	different thing															different thing		< allakaq-?-				allakayaq	allakxyaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u257 \u1103 \u1179 \
allakagh-	fk]zrf4-	alone		
\f2\i used in the quantifier/qualifier construction;
\f0\i0  allakaan \'91he by himself\'92; allakaghmeng \'91they separately the ohters\'92; Ugusami aghnaghaam angayuqani ugkemeng manisfikluki ugkemeng ellmi 
\f2\i allakaghmi
\f0\i0  taagken iitghumalghii ungavigmun. \'91When it was cooked the girl took food to her parents and then went into the inner sleeping enclosure 
\f2\i by herself.\'92
\f0\i0  (UNGIPAGHAGH.  161)	separately from others												alone; separately from others		< alla-?-l PE atlakka3 (under PE atla)			allakaniq	allakagh-	allakagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
allakagh-	fk]zrf4-	independent (become ~)		allakaghtuq \'91he broke away and became independent\'92/ yuuk ellmineng angyangyami allakaghtuq \'91 the man became independent when he got a boat for himself\'92									check; note how like the CAY this is				to become independent (of one\'92s family, or the like)		< alla-?-		A&W 8		allakagh-	allakagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
allakaghtaq	fk]zrf5nf2	strange thing or person															strange thing or person		< allakagh-?				allakaghtaq	allakaghtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
allakaghte-	fk]zrf5ns-	separate oneself from the others		yuuk ellmineng angyangyani allakaghtuq \'91when the man got a boat of his own he went off from the others\'92													to separate oneself from the others		< alla-?-		VK		allakaghte-	allakaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
allakaniq*	fk]zrfyb2	different (slightly ~ thing)															slightly different thing		< allakagh-?-				allakaniq*	allakaniq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \
allake-	fk]zrs-	find (it) different or unfamiliar		allakaa \'91he considers it different from what it was or from what he expected it to be\'92 / allakamken elngaatall anglighllagumaaten esghallemneng ima kiik \'91I notice a big difference in you since you have grown so much since I saw you last summer\'92; elngaatall allakaa gginaan naten lliillgha tuquyugutanganeng aawhkaghhaaneng \'91he noticed the big difference in the appearance of her face due to her long illness\'92; allakutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  find each other different\'92; allaki \'91to notice a difference\'92	different (find (it) ~)	unfamiliar (find (it) ~)											to find (it) different or unfamiliar		< alla-ke\super 1\nosupersub -			allakunginagh-	allake-	allake-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 -\
allakunginagh-	fk]zre3byf4-	confused (get ~)		allakunginaghtuq \'91he is confused, it is going haywire\'92 /	hawire (go ~)												to get confused; to go haywire		< allake-?-(ng)inagh-				allakunginagh-	allakunginagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
allameng	fk]zvs3	more		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 some more	again											more; some more; again		< alla-
\f2\i abl.-mod.				
\f0\i0 allameng	allameng	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \
allaneghtaq	fk]zys5nf2	group (one from outside of ~)		
\f2\i either one outside a group, or a recent additon to a group from outside
\f0\i0 ; ataasiiguq allaneghtaghput angyami \'91the number of non-crewmembers in the boat is one\'92; quyakamken allaneghtaghqaq \'91I\'92m glad you\'92re joining\'92; allaneghtaaguq \'91he\'92s an outsider\'92	member, new	member (non-~)							check; glossed as nengllugutngunghilnguq, but the examples don\'92t refer exclusively to the household	outsider			one from outside of group; non- or new member; outsider		PE atlan03 (under PE atla); < alla-neq-taq\super 2\nosupersub  		A&W 8		allaneghtaq	allaneghtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
allangughte-	fk]z3e5ns-	change		allangughtuq \'91it changed\'92 /	become different	different (become ~)											to change; to become different	bpvtyzncz	< alla-(ng)ughte-		CK V & E 133 (Russ voc)		allangughte-	allangughte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
allanighutkaghqaq	fk]zyb4enrf52f2	variety of birds		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exact meaning ?	
\f0\i0 birds (variety of ~)												variety of birds				CK Rub 65		allanighutkaghqaq	allanighutkaghqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
allaniigh-	fk]zy74-	commit adultery			adultery (commit ~)												to commit adultery		< alla-niigh-		CK Rub 65 CK 		allanigh-	allanxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
allanqik	fk]zy2br	again (once ~)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  ayveghaghluteng enkaam ama allanqik nanughaghlutengllu \'91they had caught a walrus and additionally a polar bear!\'92; allanqik aghvenglaataamaat awatangaghniistun \'91they caught a whale once again as they did last year\'92	additionally												once again; additionally		< alla-nqigte-				allanqik	allanqik	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \
allapetqa	fk]zgsn2f	more		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle	
\f0\i0 again												more; again		< alla + petqa (compound word; second component from Chukchi p0tq0 \'91repeat, again\'92)		CK Rub 65		allapetqa	allapetqa	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1179 \u1072 \
allataq	fk]znf2	someone else\'92s thing		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  ellngan ayemsimaa allataq igaasiq \'91he broke someone else\'92s pencil in half\'92													someone else\'92s thing		< alla-taq\super 2		\nosupersub CK Rub 66		allataq	allataq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
allayug-	fk]z/u-	strange (feel ~ or out of place)		allayugtuq \'91he feels strange or feels that he's in strange surroundings\'92													to feel strange or out of place		PE atlayu!- (under PE atla); < alla-yug-				allayug-	allayug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1102 \u1075 -\
alleg-	fk]su-	sweep		allegtuq \'91he swept\'92; aallgaa \'91he swept it\'92 / aallgaquq \'91he sweeps, or, he is sweeping\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  palleg-	brush off												to sweep; to brush off		PY-S a@0!-\super 2			\nosupersub allegek, allegvike-	alleg-	alleg-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 -\
allegek 	fk]susr	shaman's broom used to "brush off"  illness			dumping place for lamp sediment or disease								check				shaman's broom used to "brush off"  illness; dumping place for lamp sediment or disease	vtcnj ult j,sxyj jxbofkb lyj ;bhybrf jn jcflrf.vtcnj relf ,hjcfkb ,jktpym ,jkmyjuj	< alleg-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 allegek 	allegek 	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1082 \
allegvike-	fk]sudbrs-	infect		allegvikaa \'91he infected her\'92 / Mekelghiighhaam petamineng 
\f2\i allegvikii
\f0\i0  igaghyam ilangi.\'92 The little boy 
\f2\i spread
\f0\i0  his chicken pox to a part of the school.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 24)													to infect		< alleg-vike- 			allegviknagh-	allegvike-	allegvike-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
allegviknagh-	fk]sudbry]f4-	susceptible to contagion (be ~)															to be susceptible to contagion		< allegvike-nagh-				allegviknagh-	allegviknagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
allgegh-	fk][s4-	appear		allgeghtuq \'91it appeared, he was born\'92 / allgeghtaa \'91he brought it into existence, he obtained it\'92; kiighwyat allgeghtut \'91the northern lights appeared\'92; naken allgeghtaqsigu? \'91where did you get it?\'92; allgeghtaq \'91something acquired\'92; allgeghutaa \'91he obtained or created something for it\'92; Pingayut yuget 
\f2\i allgeghtut
\f0\i0  naaygham awatanganeng. \'91Three men 
\f2\i appeared
\f0\i0  from behind the mountain.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 24); Aghnam taghnughhaghaa 
\f2\i allgeqaaguq
\f0\i0  upenghami. \'91The woman\'92s baby 
\f2\i was born
\f0\i0  in the spring.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 24)	emerge	born (be ~)											to appear; to emerge; to be born						allgegh-	allgegh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1099 \u1271 -\
allgeghvik	fk][s4dbr	birthday															birthday		< allgegh-vik				allgeghvik	allgeghvik	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1099 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
allgelleq	fk][sk]s2	birthday															birthday		< allgegh-lleq				allgelleq	allgelleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
allghiinegh-	fk]57ys4-	disobedient (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)	
\f0\i0 capricious (be ~)	follow one\'92s own wishes only											to be disobedient; to be capricious; to follow one\'92s own wishes only	ytgjckeiysq. cdjtyhfdysq			CK V & E 131, Rub 64		allghinegh-	allghxnegh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1251 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 -\
allghuu-	fk]58-	first boat that comes to aid a boat that is catching a whale ( be the ~)		angyat ataasit allghuugut \'91one boat went to aid in harpooning a whale\'92; kinkut allghuugat? \'91who are the first who come to help?\'92; allghuulget aghveghem nalighneghaneng pikayuget \'91usually the first boat that comes to help gets a choice part of the whale\'92	boat (be the first ~ that comes to aid a boat that is catching a whale)								check; explained: kinkut aghveghat aleghsiyuwhaaqaq allghuumeng atelget\'92 which VK translates as \'91the first boat that comes to aide a boat that is in the process of getting a whale\'92; also a noun?				to be the first boat that comes to aid a boat that is catching a whale				A&W 8		allghu-	allghx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1263 -\
alligh-	fk]b4-			
\f2\i root
\f0\i0  > allighaq, allighta																			alligh-	alligh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
allighagh-	fk]b4f4-	prepare a bed		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 allighaq	bed (prepare a ~)								verbal form of alliighaq; are both legitimate words? check				to prepare a bed	pfcnbkfnm. ghbujnjdkznm gjcntkm			Rub. 61		allighagh-	allighagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
allighaq	fk]b4f2	mattress		
\f2\i also plural for one													
\f0\i0 mattress		PE atli3a3 (under PE at(0)); < alligh-ghaq				allighaq	allighaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
allighsiigh-	fk]b5c74-	make socks															to make socks		< allighta-?-		CK Rub 61		allighsigh-	allighsxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
allighta	fk]b5nf	skin sock (deerskin for women; sealskin for men)															skin sock (deerskin for women; sealskin for men)		PE a@i3t0; < alligh-ta				allighta	allighta	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
allighteraaq	fk]b5nsh62	knitted sock			yarn sock	foot wrapping used in place of a sock											sock knitted of yarn; foot wrapping used in place of a sock		< allighta-raaq				allighteraq	allighterxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
alligte-	fk]b[ns-	remain in an obscured place		ayveq ayvasaasluku atghaghluni alligtuq \'91a walrus that we wounded went down and did not come up again\'92; esngihqwaghluni alleglleghii payugtaqa \'91when he went beachcoming and stayed away I went to check on him\'92; kevgaqa nani alligtuq \'91the one I sent on an errand got delayed somewhere\'92	go and not return	stay away too long							check; the explanation given is: agzightuq nemini, which VK translates as \'91having to do with staying in the same place without moving, or going someplace and not returning\'92				to remain in an obscured place; to go and not return; to stay away too long				A&W 8		alligte-	alligte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
allngig-	fk]3bu-	patch a boot sole		naatghiimaak kaamgegka, allngikaghqek \'91my boots have worn out soles, please patch them\'92													to sew a patch onto a boot sole		PE a@&i!				allngig-	allngig-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1080 \u1075 -\

\f1\b allngik\super 1\nosupersub  	
\f0\b0 fk]3br\super \'a1	\nosupersub patch on boot sole															patch on boot sole		PE a@&i!				allngik1 	allngik1 	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1080 \u1082 1\

\f1\b allngik\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fk]3br\super \'99	\nosupersub school of fish		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 allngiguluni iqalluk igleghsimaaq \'91the fish went in a school\'92	fish (school of ~)												school of fish				CK Rub 62		allngik2	allngik2	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1080 \u1082 2\
allngugh-	fk]3e4-	submerge		allngughtuq \'91it dove\'92 / allngughvikaa \'91he dove into it or dove after it\'92; kangghwaak allngughtuq \'91the duck dove into the water\'92	dive under water												to submerge; to dive under water		PE a&@u3-				allngugh-	allngugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
allngughte-	fk]3]e5ns-	tan (a bird skin) for use		atkugkat qawaagem amiirii allngughlluki wetku ulimaaqiit \'91the bird skins are tanned before they are made into a parka\'92; atkugkameng aghnaq allngughtiiq \'91the woman is tanning bird skins to make a parka\'92									check; the explanation or gloss given is: qawaagem amiiraaneng sanaghtilghii \'91tanning process of bird skin\'92				to tan (a bird skin) for use						allngughte-	allngughte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
allnguqayuk	fk]3]e2f/r	diving bird or other thing			submarine												diving bird or other thing; submarine		< allngugh-kayuk				allnguqayuk	allnguqayuk	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \
allughqaq	fk]/52f2	adopted child		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  allughqi-	child, adopted												adopted child						allughqaq	allughqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
allughqi-	fk]/52b-	adopt (a child)		allughqiiq \'91he adopted (a child)\'92; allughqii \'91he adopted him \'91/ allughqilleqaa \'91he will adopt him\'92													to adopt (a child)		PY-S a@u3-			allughqikaq	allughqi-	allughqi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 -\
allughqikaq	fk]/52brf2	adopted child			child, adopted												adopted child		< allughqi-(g)kaq				allughqikaq	allughqikaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
allumyagte-	fk]/vmz[ns-	act on (it) almost but not quite in its entirety		tepaghllaga esnam saghnayaqmegteggu allumyagtaat \'91they gathered almost all the sea life that was on the shore\'92; aghnam qawaalghun aftalaamakanga allumyaglluku \'91the woman butchered almost all the birds\'92; allumyagtaa aghvigani \'91she has done most of her washing\'92; eslalluk allumyagtaa \'91most of the rain is done\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  allute-	get the most out of what is available	most of what was to be done (have done ~)							check; explaned as: kergam sangwaa qamagtevziqaq, which VK translates as \'91doing something to almost all of it\'92	most of what was to occur to have happened			to act on (it) almost but not quite in its entirety; to get the most out of what is available; to have done most of what was to be done; for most of what was to occur to have happened				A&W 8		allumyagte-	allumyagte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1100 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
allungak	fk]/3fr	bottom part of container		allungighaqaak akmagutak nunivalghutaalukek kiikun \'91he is putting a bottom onto the barrel shell so that he can use it next summer as a container for greens\'92	base part of container												bottom or base part of a container		PY-S a@u&$ak				allungak	allungak	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \
allungelquq	fk]/3sk]2e2	ice pan		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 allungak; 
\f2\i see item 1 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												ice pan (an early winter ice formation, circular or oval in shape, with edges too thin to support walking)						allungelquq	allungelquq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
allute-	fk]/ns-	act, or act on (it), entirely or almost entirely		allulluteng \'91essentially all of them\'92; allulluku iitek aqavzik inghumakangat \'91they picked all or almost all the salmonberries in one area\'92; \'85 net 
\f2\i allulluteng
\f0\i0  igleghlleghhiit qimugsimeng. \'91\'85 the household or family moving 
\f2\i together
\f0\i0  by dogteam.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 136); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  allumyagte-									check; explained as: kiyang uglangha pikaq, ilanga siipluni, which VK tranaslates as \'91doing something to the entire(ty) of it, but leaving some of it out\'92				to act, or act on (it), entirely or almost entirely				A&W 8		allute-	allute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1090 \u1099 -\
almeghaq	fkvs4f2	whale type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined									
\f0\i0 what kind ?				a kind of whale						almeghaq	almeghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
almesimitun	fkvscbvbney	same as before		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 the same as before		< almesiqe-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 almesimitun	almesimitun	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
almesiq	fkvscb2	old custom		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 tradition	custom, old											old custom; tradition	cnfhsq j,sxfq. nhflbwbz			CK V & E 98		almesiq	almesiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
almesiqe-	fkvscb2s-	expected (be as ~)		almesiquq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  almesiqaa \'91that's the way it is\'92; 
\f2\i Almesiqeftaa
\f0\i0  nutem tawaten mesagllak. \'91It was 
\f2\i always
\f0\i0  boggy there.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:4)	stay the same	same (stay the ~)											to be as expected; to stay the same		< almesiq-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				almesiqe-	almesiqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
Alngighyak	Fk3b4mzr	Algneeyak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Algneeyak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Alngighyak	Alngighyak	\uc0\u1040 \u1083 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
alngunaghqe-	fk3eyf52s-	act carelessly			carelessly (act ~)												to act carelessly		< alngunak-?-				alngunaghqe-	alngunaghqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
alngunaghqute-	fk3eyf52ens-	jumble things		alngunaghqusimiit nekeghqughwaaqat igat \'91they jumbled up the books that were neatly put away\'92; ivaghiluni saghya alngunaghqusimaa \'91he messed up everything when he was looking for something\'92; alngunaghqutii ulimasit \'91he messed up the tools\'92	mess things up								check; explained as: akulluti, which VK translates as \'91jumbling things\'92				to jumble things; to mess things up		< alngunaghqe-(u)te-		A&W 9		alngunaghqute-	alngunaghqute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
alngunak	fk3eyfr	any way		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Kina 
\f2\i alngunak
\f0\i0  yuuk ateghaataquq aqfaquq piinlinghani. Nukalpigaq iingunaghmi avelghaghyaghqaanghilnguq tawavek. \'91
\f2\i Any
\f0\i0  man goes down when the running starts. All young men must not refrain from taking part in that.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:48); Iteghluni elngaatall pangalgaghtaamalghii 
\f2\i alngunak
\f0\i0  tamaani teghigniqepiglluni. \'92After he came in he ran all around 
\f2\i at random
\f0\i0  enjoying himself very much.\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 3); Iwernga whanga piimsi, kitum 
\f2\i alngunak
\f0\i0  ugumiyaguskumigu yulgutni, nanqigtivigmun aglaghsaqleguuq. \'91However I say to you that 
\f2\i whosoever
\f0\i0  hates his fellow, is liable to judgment.\'92 (Matthew 5:22)	random (at ~)	anything											any way; at random; anything						alngunak	alngunak	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
alngunaseghagh-	fk3eyfcs4f4-	act carelessly			carelessly (act ~)												to act carelessly		< alngunak-?-				alngunaseghagh-	alngunaseghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
alpa	fk]gf	murre, common			
\f2\i Uria aalge	
\f0\i0 common murre											common murre
\f2\i  (Uria aalge)		
\f0\i0 PE alpa(!)				alpa	alpa	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1072 \
alpag-	fk]gfu-	pass through (an obstacle, physical or otherwise)		alpagtuq \'91he went through (a place or time)\'92; alpagaa \'91he went through it\'92 / alpagvigituq \'91it is impassable\'92	go through												to pass through (an obstacle, physical or otherwise); to go through		PE alpa!-				alpag-	alpag-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
alqegkaq	fk]2s[rf2	sourdock		= elqegkaq	arctic dock
\f2\i  	
\f0\i0 dock (Arctic ~)								
\f2\i Rumex arcticus			
\f0\i0 sourdock; arctic dock
\f2\i  (Rumex arcticus)						
\f0\i0 alqegkaq	alqegkaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
alqimagh-	fk]2bvf4-	lick		alqimaghtuq \'91he licked something\'92; alqimaghaa \'91he licked it\'92 /	taste												to lick; to taste		PY alqima3-				alqimagh-	alqimagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -\
alqimiin	fk]2bv7y	overhang of ice or hard snow		alqimiitet yakughnalghiit lengkekayuget \'91cornices are dangerous becuase they can tumble down\'92; 
\f2\i see item 2 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	cornice	sea ice type											overhang of ice or hard snow; cornice		< alqimagh-?-(u)n				alqimin	alqimxn	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1251 \u1085 \
alqimsug-	fk]2bvceu-	snack		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to snack				CK Rub 62		alqimsug-	alqimsug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1089 \u1091 \u1075 -\
alquutagh-	fk]28nf4-	spoon (use a ~)		alquutaghtuq \'91he ate something with a spoon, used a spoon\'92; alquutaghaa \'91he spooned it, used a spoon to eat, stir or serve it\'92 /													to use a spoon		PY-S alqutaq				alqutagh-	alqxtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
alquutaq	fk]28nf2	spoon		alquutaghpak \'91stirring or serving spoon\'92													spoon		PY-S alqutaq				alqutaq	alqxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
alukaneq	fk/rfys2	ridge, low, on surface of snow (caused by wind)		
\f2\i Alukaneghqun
\f0\i0  naagllunga ikuska aqnightaqa. \'91I stumbled over a low obstruction and hurt my elbow.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 103)	obstructions, low, in waves on surface of snow (or sand) caused by wind	sastrugi								wavy surface caused by drifting snow			low ridge on surface of snow (caused by wind); sastrugi; low obstructions in waves on surface of snow (or sand) caused by wind; wavy surface caused by drifting snow		PE alu!- 				alukaneq	alukaneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
alungaghun	fk/364ey	hood of parka (center part of ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 center part of parka hood		< alunge-?		CK Rub 60		alungaghun	alungaghun	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
alunge-	fk/3s-	lap with the tongue		alunguq (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  alungutuq) \'91he lapped something\'92; alungaa \'91he lapped it\'92 /	lick												to lap with the tongue; to lick					alungragh-, alungutelleq	alunge-	alunge-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1099 -\
alungragh-	fk/3hf4-	lap repeatedly		alungraghtuq \'91it licked its paws\'92; alungraghaa \'91it repeatedly lapped at it\'92 /	lick paws (of a dog)												to repeatedly lap; to lick paws (of a dog)		< alunge-ragh-				alungragh-	alungragh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
alungutelleq	fk/3ensk]s2	snowless area in lee of building		
\f2\i so called because it seems as if a hollow has been licked out there	
\f0\i0 snow bank												area in lee of building without much snow; snow bank		< alunge-te\super 3\nosupersub -lleq				alungutelleq	alungutelleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aluq	fk/2	blade of oar or paddle		angwaaghutem taam alaa quupaghsimaaq \'91the blade of that paddle is cracked\'92; ilanga aluq kenlemikun ayemumaaq \'91the blade broke off at the crack\'92									check -- but confirmed by Rub.!				blade of oar or paddle		PE alu(3)		A&W 9; Rub. 60		aluq	aluq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1179 \
alwinanga	fk1byf3f	knife, broad, similar to a scraper, on a long shaft, used for butchering whale in the water		
\f2\i Chukotkan									
\f0\i0 used also on SLI?				broad knife, similar to a scraper, on a long shaft, used for butchering whale in the water		from, or related to, Chukchi el!0k \'91to treat a skin on a board, to scrape\'92				alwinanga	alwinanga	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1265 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \

\f1\b ama\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fvf\'a1	also		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Aqfaqumi tamaakut sukaaghikat, paghyuneghlluget kayaalqiikayuget.  
\f2\i Ama
\f0\i0  tughumghatmi, iknaqelghiit tughumghallget yugiqengegkayuget. \'91In running, those who have become fast and don\'92t wear down easily win. 
\f2\i Also
\f0\i0 , in wrestling, those who are strong and who are skilled wrestlers win.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:50); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 saama													also		from Chukchi 0m0. 0m0& \'91also, even, furthermore\'92, if not from CSY ama(ni) \'91over there\'92			amalleqa, amawha	ama1	ama1	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 1\
amaa	fv6	wolf		
\f2\i the wolf is found in Chukotka but not on St. Lawrence Is.; Amaaghllak
\f0\i0  pilaataghtuq, \'93Iluuq.\'94 \'93Aay!\'94 \'93Waamtamken, nayagitunga, avangitunga!\'94 The big 
\f2\i wolf
\f0\i0  said then, \'93Hey, pal.\'94 \'93Yes?\'94  \'93 I fooled you. I don\'92t have a sister, I don\'92t have one!\'92 (KALLAG. 21); Takulleqiisi penniighsugnighqelluteng, taawanginaq ugighsalghiistun 
\f2\i amaastun
\f0\i0  ayuqut. \'91They come to you trying to appear like sheep, but actually they are like fierce 
\f2\i wolves
\f0\i0 .\'92 (Matthew 7.15)	
\f2\i Canis lupus												
\f0\i0 wolf (Canis lupus)		PE amaqu3			amaqaghaghaq, amaaghaq	ama	amx	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u257 \
amaaghaghaq	fv64f4f2	wolf cub															baby wolf; wolf cub		< amaa-ghaq-ghaq				amaghaghaq	amxghaghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
amaaghaq	fv64f2	baby bird		
\f2\i litterally
\f0\i0 , \'91baby wolf\'92	auklet chick	person who is too young for a given situation 
\f2\i (slang)								
\f0\i0 chick (auklet ~)			baby bird; auklet chick; person who is too young for a given situation 
\f2\i (slang)		
\f0\i0 < amaa-ghaq				amaghaq	amxghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
amaamighute-	fv6vb4ens-	line (be in ~ with each other in someone's sight)		amaamighutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  are in line with each other, one directly behind the other\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  amagyuk, amasiiq													to be in line with each other in someone's sight						amamighute-	amxmighute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Amagaghmii(t)	Fvfuf4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< ?-mii			xxxt	Amagaghmi(t)	Amagaghmx(t)	\u1040 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
amagh-	fvf4-	carry on one\'92s shoulders		amaghtuq \'91he carried someone\'92 amaghaa \'91he carried him\'92 /	shoulders (carry on one\'92s ~)												to carry on one\'92s shoulders		PE ama3-			amaghagh-, amaghtu, amakeseghaagh-, amaqe-, amaghlleq	amagh-	amagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -\
amaghagh-	fvf4f4-	carry on one\'92s shoulders (continue to ~)			shoulders (continue to carry on one\'92s ~)												to continue to carry on one\'92s shoulders		< amagh-?-				amaghagh-	amaghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
amaghan	fvf4fy	rope attached to harpoon		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rope attached to harpoon				CK Rub 66		amaghan	amaghan	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \
amaghlleq	fvf5k]s2	overlapping slab(s) of ice along a crack in a field of sea ice		
\f2\i see item 3 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	slab(s) of overlapping ice along a crack in a field of sea ice	ice (overlapping slab(s) of ~ along a crack in a field of sea ice)								sea ice type			overlapping slab(s) of ice along a crack in a field of sea ice		< amaghte-lleq				amaghlleq	amaghlleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
Amaghmelnguut	fvf4vsk38n	Ittygran Island (site in Chukotka on ~)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka on Ittygran Island				Men. 1972, 1975		amaghmelngut	amaghmelngxt	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1263 \u1090 \
amaghneq	fvf4ys2	seam			crack	fissure											seam; crack; fissure		< amaghte-neq\super 2 				\nosupersub amaghneq	amaghneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
amaghte-	fvf5ns-	criss-cross															to criss-cross						amaghte-	amaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
amaghtu	fvf5ne	humpback salmon			pink salmon	
\f2\i Oncorhynchus gorbusch								
\f0\i0 salmon, humpback or pink			humpback or pink salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha)		PE ama3tu3; < amagh-?-				amaghtu	amaghtu	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \
amaghtugh-	fvf5ne4-	throw  down (in wrestling)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 to throw  down (in wrestling)	dfkbn, rkfltn yf kjgfnrb; ,hjcfnm xthtp ct,z			CK V & E 98		amaghtugh-	amaghtugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
amagyuk	fvfum/r	line down the middle of something		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 amaamighute-, amasiiq	line down the back of a whale from the mid-area to the fluke												line down the middle of something; line down the back of a whale from the mid-area to the fluke						amagyuk	amagyuk	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
amakesegaagh-	fvfrscsu64-	carry piggyback		amakesegaaghtuq \'91he carried someone piggyback\'92; amakesegaaghaa he \'91carried her piggyback\'92 /	piggyback (carry ~)												to carry piggyback		< amagh-?-				amakesegagh-	amakesegxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u257 \u1271 -\
amalighneq	fvfkb4ys2	opposite side of something 		amalighneghani \'91on the opposite or back side of it, behind it\'92	back side of something	behind something											opposite, or back, side of something 	ghjnbdjgjkj;yfz cnjhjyf xtuj-k>	< ama(ni)-lighneq		Rub. 66		amalighneq	amalighneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
amalka	fvfk]rf	for instance		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Kiyang yuga aghqesaghtughvilek naantaqluteng. Ilangi angyameng piiqluteng. Kiyang qamaglluni. Enkaam 
\f2\i amalka
\f0\i0  ayumiqulleq kaspugtaquq. \'91Most of the people have a memorial (of the dead) ceremony somewhere. Some perform it at their boat. Most everybody does it. Then, 
\f2\i it's like
\f0\i0 , it concludes the year.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:242)	for example	correctly								proper or traditional way (in the ~)			for instance; for example; correctly; in the proper or traditional way		from Chukchi ? or Koryak emelke \'91it is good; all right; it is permissible\'92				amalka	amalka	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \
amalleqa	fvfk]s2f	also		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  
\f2\i Amalleqa
\f0\i0  amiirii aghvigluki yataaghqellghi piiqiit keligaghwaaghluki. \'91
\f2\i Also
\f0\i0  after they washed their (the birds\'92) skins, they prepared them, scraping them.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:106)	other hand (on the ~)	on the other hand											also; on the other hand		< ama=lleqa				amalleqa	amalleqa	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \
amaqe-	fvf2s-	carry on one\'92s back		amaqaa \'91he carried it on his back\'92 / < amagh-?-													to carry on one\'92s back						amaqe-	amaqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
Amaraka	Fvfhfrf	America		Amarakaghmii \'91an American\'92; 
\f2\i also used in Chukotka 													
\f0\i0 America		from English \'91America\'92	SLI Chuk.	R67, V&E76		Amaraka	Amaraka	\uc0\u1040 \u1084 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \
amaseketaagh-	fvfcsrsn64-	carry someone on one\'92s back		
\f2\i Chukotkan (Rub.); questioned									
\f0\i0 cf. amakeseghaagh-  \'91to carry on piggy back\'92; check				to carry someone on one\'92s back	yjcbnm yf cgbyt rjuj-k>			Rub. 67		amaseketagh-	amaseketxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
amasiiq	fvfc72	game played by boys who throw a stick on a line		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 amagyuk, amaamighute-													a game played by boys who throw a stick on a line						amasiq	amasxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
amawha	fvf[1f	whenever		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  amawha amik uumgaqa anuqem qelpeghtaa \'91whenever I close the door the wind opens it\'92	repeatedly	every time											whenever; repeatedly; every time		< ama-wha				amawha	amawha	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1093 \u1265 \u1072 \
amel-	fvsk-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > amelkestaaghhaq, ameltu-, amellayi-, amesuwali, ameltaarak																			amel-	amel-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 -\
amelkestaaghhaq*	fvsk]rscn65f2	narrow thing		amelkestaaghhaaguq \'91it is narrow\'92													narrow thing		< amel-staaghhaq				amelkestaghhaq*	amelkestxghhaq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
amellayi-	fvsk]zqb-	narrow (become or make ~)		amellayiiq \'91he slimmed down\'92; amellayii \'91he made it narrow\'92 or \'91he slimmed down\'92 / kemgighyalghiimi weni amellayimaa \'91she lost some weight and became slimmer\'92; uunghaq amellayiluku llaaghanwha piniightaa \'91making the harpoon narrower it\'92s better now\'92	slim down	thin (become or make ~)							check; explained as: amelli, which VK translates as \'91making something narrow, or something getting slim\'92				to become or make narrow or thin; to slim down		< amel-?-		A&W 9		amellayi-	amellayi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1253 \u1080 -\
ameltaarak	fvsk]6hfr	rare item		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rare item		< amel-?-		CK Rub 71		ameltarak	ameltxrak	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
ameltu-	fvsk]ne-	wide (be ~)		ameltuuq \'91it is wide\'92 / kiiwek ameltuuk \'91the river is wide\'92; ameltuqaq \'91wide thing\'92													to be wide		< amel-tu-				ameltu-	ameltu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 -\

\f1\b ameltutala\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fvsk]nenfkz\super s	\nosupersub width			separation between things												width; separation between things	hfccnjzybt vt;le xev-k>	< ameltu-tala		Rub. 71		ameltutalae	ameltutalae	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
amen	fvsy	then		
\f2\i particle; Amen
\f0\i0  quyakaaguq umiilek elngaatall. Piniipigleghhiit qepghaghtet taakut iflakaayalghiit unguvaslaataghniluki. \'91
\f2\i Yes
\f0\i0 , the chief was very much happy. For keeping the really good workers who were lost, alive.\'92 (PANGEGH. 58)	there	but come to think of it								yes (indeed)			then; there; but come to think of it, yes (indeed)		from Chukchi \'91am0n \'91and then unexpectedly\'92			amenam, amennguq, amenqun	amen	amen	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1085 \
amenam	fvsyfv	so then		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Kaviingnaquteperewaaghllak, katam maaten tugutluggnaqeghllallemtestun. 
\f2\i Amenam
\f0\i0  maligunnaqaqsalghiinga kaviighniighmun, taawa uqengeghmetaqelghiinga. \'91It was all about trying to get foxes, like how we now try to get ivory. 
\f2\i So then
\f0\i0  when I tagged along in trapping foxes, I would feel very satisfied.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:174)	unexpectedly												so then; unexpectedly		< amen-?				amenam	amenam	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \u1084 \
amennguq	fvsy3e2	then it is said		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 then it is said		< amen-nguq				amennguq	amennguq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1085 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
amenqun	fvsy2ey	remember		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Nenglutuqaq, iiggesnanighaqegkanginkut neghsameng nuyaaghqiinayukamta 
\f2\i amenqun
\f0\i0  tepa sangwaa aliighnayukan ighlekeluugutangat. \'91There were old underground dwellings they would tell us not to dig in case we ward off the seals; as 
\f2\i you know
\f0\i0 , their reason not to do so is that some odor might come out.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:66)	you know	know (you ~)											remember; you know		< amen-qun				amenqun	amenqun	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
ameriigaghaq	fvsg7uf4f2	thin thing		
\f2\i Ameriigaghallghi
\f0\i0  tamaakut qupneghqutaghqat, \'85 \'91
\f2\i The thinner ones
\f0\i0  of them were used for bering cisco nets, \'85\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:24); Angvigapaaghrugnguq, 
\f2\i ameriigaghaq
\f0\i0 , tagnemllaaq aghnaq. \'91She was a quite tall, 
\f2\i thin
\f0\i0 , dark woman.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. II:9)													thin thing						amerigaghaq	amerxgaghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1087 \u1251 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
amesugali	fvsc/ufkb	narrow thing		mekelghiiq taana angvigalghii amesugali kinangaawa? \'91who is that tall slender lad?\'92; qamislikagni amesugalingulukek ulimaniiqaak \'91he said that he\'92s making the sled he\'92s building kind of narrow\'92; naagu savik amesugali? \'91where is the thin knife?	slim thing								check; explained as: amesiighak, which VK translates as \'91kind of narrow or slim\'92, given as amesugwali and as amesuwali, should it be amesuwali  instead of amesugali?				narrow thing; slim thing				A&W 9		amesugali	amesugali	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \
amesuwali	fvsc/1fkb	thin thing		naagu savik amesuwali? \'91where is the thin knife?\'92													thin thing		< amel-?		VK		amesuwali	amesuwali	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \
ametall	fvsnfk]	still		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle	
\f0\i0 yet	at least try											still; yet; at least try		from Chukchi \'93emIte\'92t\'94 \'91at once, just now\'92, or 0m0l\'92et0 \'91all together, wholly\'92				ametall	ametall	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \
amghuneq	fv4eys2	greedy person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 grasping person												greedy person; grasping person	;flysq. fkxysq	< amghute-neq\super 2		\nosupersub Rub. 67		amghuneq	amghuneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
amghute-	fv4ens-	not leave anything for others		tepaghtughnaluteng aqfasalghiimeng pinillghaneng ilangita amghusimakangit \'91they went to eat edible seashore life but the others hadn\'92t left any good ones\'92	leave anything for others (not ~)								check; explained as: ilateng avangunaki naangutiilghiit, which VK translates as \'91not leaving anything for others\'92; cf. amghuneq \'91greedy, grasping\'92 at Rub. 67				to not leave anything for others				A&W 9		amghute-	amghute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
amgiwhta	fvub[1nf	sled runner trimming		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual,
\f0\i0  amgiwhtek
\f2\i , for one													
\f0\i0 sled runner trimming				CK Rub 67		amgiwhta	amgiwhta	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1075 \u1080 \u1093 \u1265 \u1090 \u1072 \
amgusigh-	fvuecb4-	tie one thing to another		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to tie one thing to another	ghbdzpsdfnm jlby ghtlvtn r lheujve			Rub. 67		amgusigh-	amgusigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
amigh-	fvb4-	put skin on (a skin-boat)		aminghhaq \'91newly covered boat\'92													to put skin on (a skin-boat)		< amiq-ligh-				amigh-	amigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 -\
amighaq	fvb4f2	skin prepared for use on the hull of a skin boat															skin prepared for use on the hull of a skin boat		PE ami3a3 (under PE ami3); < amigh-ghaq				amighaq	amighaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
amighqaq	fvb52f2	skin prepared for use on the hull of a skin boat															skin prepared for use on the hull of a skin boat		< amigh-kaq				amighqaq	amighqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
amighqwaaq	fvb52162	bird skin			skin of bird												bird skin		< amiq-kwaaq				amighqwaq	amighqwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
amighregaq	fvb4hsuf2	skin on body															skin on body		< amiq-regaq				amighregaq	amighregaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
amightu	fvb5ne	
\f2\i Lota lota			
\f0\i0 burbot												burbot 
\f2\i (Lota lota)				
\f0\i0 SLI Cur. Man. 54		amightu	amightu	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \
Amigtuughet	Fvb[n84sn	clan (a particular ~)		
\f2\i singular is 
\f0\i0 Amigtuuq													a particular clan						Amigtughet	Amigtxghet	\uc0\u1040 \u1084 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1263 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \
amiigigh-	fv7ub4-	fence off			block (place an obstacle in his/its way)												to fence off; to block				CK V & E 184 CK		amigigh-	amxgigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1251 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
amiin	fv7y	ice formation extending from sea ice over the shore to which it is frozen		
\f2\i see item 4 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	ice that stretches from a floating or fast iceberg	sea ice type											ice formation extending from sea ice over the shore to which it is frozen; ice that stretches from a floating or fast iceberg		< amiq-?				amin	amxn	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1251 \u1085 \
amiiqaq	fv72f2	walrus skin, whole		Inwa salegnun, atungalegnun, 
\f2\i amiiqalegnun
\f0\i0 , unaghsilegnun tunqughaqegkangit. \'91Not to mention trading with people having  things like skin for covering boats, 
\f2\i whole walrus skins
\f0\i0 , and wood.\'92 (PANGEGH. 60)													whole walrus skin		< amiq-?				amiqaq	amxqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1251 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
amiiraq	fv7hf2	sealskin			pelt	skin											sealskin; pelt; skin		< amiq-?				amiraq	amxraq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1251 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
amiiwraq	fv71hf2	doorpost (especially of the traditional dome-shaped house)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 doorpost (especially of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.))		< amik-?		CK Rub 68		amiwraq	amxwraq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1251 \u1265 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
amik	fvbr	door			doorway												door; doorway		PY-S amik				amik	amik	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
amikluk	fvbrk]/r	weasel		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  amiq; 
\f2\i he weasel is found in Chukotka but not on St. Lawrence Is.	
\f0\i0 ermine	
\f2\i Mustela spp.											
\f0\i0 weasel; ermine
\f2\i  (Mustela spp.)						
\f0\i0 amikluk	amikluk	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
aminakuq	fvbyfre2	water, open, left in newly formed sea ice fields due to gaps between the floes that join to form the fields		
\f2\i see item 5 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	ice that surrounds open water	sea ice type											open water left in newly formed sea ice fields due to gaps between the floes that join to form the fields; small patch of open water in heavy ice or the ice that surrounds open water						aminakuq	aminakuq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \
aminakwaaq	fvbyfr162	leftover		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  aminaqe-													leftover						aminakwaq	aminakwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
aminaqe-	fvbyf2s-	leave some for someone		aminaqaa \'91he left some of it for someone\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  aminakwaaq													to leave some for someone		PE amina3				aminaqe-	aminaqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aminghaq	fvby4f2	trimming from skin covering of boat															trimming from skin covering of boat	j,ibdrf ,fqlfhs bp ireh	< amigh-?		CK V & E 91		aminghaq	aminghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
amiq	fvb2	skin (especially of an animal)			animal skin												skin (especially of an animal)		PE ami3			amigh-, amighqwaaq, amighregaq, amiiqaq, amiiraq, amitelqak	amiq	amiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \
amiqlaq	fvb2k]z2	bat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined									
\f0\i0 what kind?				bat 				CK Rub 68		amiqlaq	amiqlaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
amisiiq	fvbc72	game in which a village is divided into two teams, each trying to outrun the other around the village		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 a game in which a village is divided into two teams, each trying to outrun the other around the village				CK Rub 69		amisiq	amisxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
amitelqak	fvbnsk]2fr	sewn-up hole in skin hull of boat		
\f2\i a dual													
\f0\i0 sewn-up hole in skin hull of boat		< PE amit-				amitelqak	amitelqak	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \
amitelqaq	fvbnsk]2f2	thin bone in forearm			radius (thin bone in forearm)	stringer (longitudinal ~ or batten of skin boat)											thin bone in forearm; radius; longitudinal stringer or batten of skin boat		PE amit-				amitelqaq	amitelqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
amiwaaq	fvb162	threshold		yuuk amiwaaghmeng amllughluni aanuq \'91a man stepped over the threshold and went outside\'92									check; explained as : neghighluku amigem asilghneghi amllughyaghii amiwaaghmeng atelget, translated by VK as \'91traditional houses had doors that did not go all the way down; they had high thresholds\'92; note that Rub. 68 has amiwaaq as \'91doorpost or jamb of door\'92				threshold		< amik -(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		A&W 10		amiwaq	amiwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b amla\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fvkzs	outside longitudinal stringer or batten of a skin boat		
\f2\i often dual for one:
\f0\i0  amlegka \'91my crotch\'92													crotch and upper leg area		PY-S am0l0				amlae	amlae	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
Amliqak	Fvkb2fr	Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. (narrows at VABM \'93Knife\'94 near center of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 narrows at VABM \'93Knife\'94 near center of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.						Amliqak	Amliqak	\uc0\u1040 \u1084 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \
amllaghwaaq	fvk]z4162	seaweed (a certain thin ~)		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined and questioned	
\f0\i0 trout-like fish (a certain ~)								both seaweed and fish???				a certain thin seaweed; a certain trout-like fish						amllaghwaq	amllaghwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
amlleqngiitigh-	fvk]s237nb4-	squeeze something between one\'92s knees		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to squeeze something between one\'92s knees				CK Rub 69		amlleqngitigh-	amlleqngxtigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\
amllugh- 	fvk]/4-	take a step (over)		amllughtuq \'91he took a step\'92; amllughaa \'91he stepped over it\'92 /	step over												to take a step (over)		PE am@u3-				amllugh- 	amllugh- 	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
amlluqiiraq	fvk]/27hf2	vegetables of any kind			greens, edible	saxifrage, heart-leafed								
\f2\i Saxifraga punctata 
\f0\i0 or
\f2\i  Saxifraga nelsoniana			
\f0\i0 vegetables of any kind; greens; 
\f2\i in particular
\f0\i0  heart-leafed saxifrage 
\f2\i (Saxifraga punctata or Saxifraga nelsoniana)		
\f0\i0 < amllugh-?				amlluqiraq	amlluqxraq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1251 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
amqeghpagte-	fv2s5gf[ns-	freeze (for ground to ~)		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91to suddenly bite\'92; amqeghpagtegpenani qaasghuunnaghnayaqanga \'91I wish it would freeze so sled runners could go over the frozen surface\'92									check; explained as aqlaghaghpaglluni nuna kumlatqaghlleghhii; note that the example seems kind of far from VK\'92s translation of it ; also what\'92s the connect between this and \'91to bite\'92, amqagh-				for ground to freeze		< amqeghte-pagte-		A&W 10		amqeghpagte-	amqeghpagte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
amqeghqugh-	fv2s52e4-	bite repeatedly															to bite repeatedly		< amqeghte-qugh-				amqeghqugh-	amqeghqugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
amqeghte-	fv2s5ns-	bite		amqeghtaa \'91he bit it\'92 /													to bite		PY amqa3- (entry apparently dropped from CED)			amqeghqugh-, amqegkagh-, amqute-	amqeghte-	amqeghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
amqeghutek	fv2s4ensr	vise															vise	nbcrb	< amqeghte-(u)n-
\f2\i dual		
\f0\i0 CK V & E 83		amqeghutek	amqeghutek	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
amqegkagh-	fv2s[rf4-	nip (take a sudden small bite)															to nip		< amqeghte-qagh-				amqegkagh-	amqegkagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
amqute-	fv2ens-	bite (take a ~ of something)		amqutuq \'91he took a bite\'92; amqutaa \'91he took a bite for her \'91/													to take a bite of something		< amqeghte-(u)te- (?)				amqute-	amqute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
amsa-	fvcz-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > amsakaghtaq, amsanaq, amsanagh-, amsakelghii, amsakeneq																			amsa-	amsa-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 -\
amsakaghtaq	fvczrf5nf2	small animal or person		Atungagmeng aangelghiimeng, 
\f2\i amsakaghtameng
\f0\i0  iwhanimeng nateghqaqegkayuguyaghpetut. \'91The material for skin-boot soles was the skin of the bearded seal, large ones and, you know, those 
\f2\i small ones
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:98); = amsakeghtaq; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  amsakelghii, amsakeneq	animal or person, small												small animal or person		< amsa-?				amsakaghtaq	amsakaghtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
amsakeghtaq	fvczrs5nf2	small animal or person		= amsakaghtaq; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  amsakelghii, amsakeneq	animal or person, small												small animal or person		< amsa-?				amsakeghtaq	 amsakeghtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
amsakelghii	fvczrsk47	small animal or person		Elngaatall akilpegaaq \'85 kaviiq, inwa kalngagaq 
\f2\i amsakleghii
\f0\i0 , amenqun aangeghllalghiit maakut. \'91There was a lot of trading going on \'85 for fox; a 
\f2\i small
\f0\i0  sack [to hold them] wasn\'92t used but rather those large ones.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:144); Aangelghiitlu, 
\f2\i amsakelghiitlu
\f0\i0  aghveghet iqallugsagnitut. \'91Big ones and 
\f2\i small ones
\f0\i0 , whales are somewhat like fish.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 64); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 amsakeneq, amsakaghtaq	animal or person, small												small animal or person		< amsa-?-lghii				amsakelghi	amsakelghx	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
amsakelleq	fvczrsk]s2	smaller or smallest one		
\f2\i used (only?) with possessed endings; 
\f0\i0 Kayagtaqegkanginkut 
\f2\i amsakellghinaaneng
\f0\i0 , nuugtunghani. \'91He urged us [only to shoot] the very 
\f2\i smallest
\f0\i0  ones as being easiest to pull.\'92 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 amsakeneq, amsakelghii													smaller one; smallest one		< amsa-?-lleq				amsakelleq	amsakelleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
amsakeneq	fvczrsys2	smaller or smallest one		
\f2\i used (only?) with possessed endings; 
\f0\i0 Taagken yugem pimakanga, \'93Una 
\f2\i amsakenghat
\f0\i0  qaaknaqaqa Honda-gpenun qayughllak Honda-gken mekestaghhaak.\'94 \'91Then the man said to me, \'93I\'92m going to put the 
\f2\i smallest one
\f0\i0  of them on your Honda because your Honda is small.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 38); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  amsakelleq													smaller one; smallest one		< amsa-?-neq				amsakeneq	amsakeneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
amsanagh-	fvczyf4-	calm weather (be ~)															to be calm (weather)		< amsa-nagh-				amsanagh-	amsanagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
amsanaghlluk	fvczyf5k]/r	calm day		amsanaghlluuguq \'91it is a calm day\'92													calm day		< amsanaq-lluk				amsanaghlluk	amsanaghlluk	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
amsanaq	fvczyf2	calm day			day, calm												calm day		< amsa-naq				amsanaq	amsanaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
amsighqe-	fvcb52s-	mend by sewing		amsighqaa \'91he mended it\'92 / amsighqiiq \'91he mended something\'92; amsighquughtuq \'91he keeps mending things\'92; = emsighqe-													to mend by sewing						amsighqe-	amsighqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
amsikagh-	fvcbrf4-	undressed		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  amsikaghtuq \'91he undressed\'92; amsikaghtaa \'91he undressed him\'92; amsikaghngaaq \'91he is naked\'92; amsikaghmi aanuq \'91he went outside naked\'92	naked												undressed; naked						amsikagh-	amsikagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
amsungisaq	fvc/3bcz2	minke whale		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 whale (minke ~)	
\f2\i Balaenoptera acutorostrata							
\f0\i0 acc. Men. comp. list -- check				minke whale 
\f2\i (Balaenoptera acutorostrata)						
\f0\i0 amsungisaq	amsungisaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
amu-	fve-	pull through an opening (of thread, rope, etc.)		amaa \'91he pulled it through\'92 / amugu \'91pull it!\'92; amuughaa \'91he kept pulling it\'92													to pull through an opening (of thread, rope, etc.)		PE amu-			amutughqe-	amu-	amu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1091 -\
amug-	fveu-	unable to see		amugaa \'91he couldn't see it \'91/	see (be unable to ~)												to be unable to see					amugite-, amugnagh-, amugtagh-, amuugte-	amug-	amug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1075 -\
amugite-	fveubns-	eyesight (have good ~)															to have good eyesight		< amug-(ng)ite-				amugite-	amugite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
amugnagh-	fveuyf4-	sight (inhibit ~)															to inhibit sight		< amug-naq				amugnagh-	amugnagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
amugtagh-	fve[nf4-	seeing (have trouble ~)		amugtaghtuq \'91he has eye trouble (temporarily or permanently)\'92													to have trouble seeing		< amug-tagh\super 3\nosupersub -				amugtagh-	amugtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
amutughqe-	fvene52s-	sew quickly															to sew quickly		< amu-?-				amutughqe-	amutughqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
amuugte-	fv8[ns-	lose one\'92s sight			sight (lose one\'92s ~)												to lose one's sight		< amug-?-				amugte-	amxgte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
amwiiwhta	fv17[1nf	shoe of sled runner			sled runner shoe	runner shoe for sled											shoe of sled runner				SLI Cur. Man. 42		amwiwhta	amwxwhta	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1265 \u1251 \u1093 \u1265 \u1090 \u1072 \
amyak	fvmzr	mussel															mussel		PY amyak				amyak	amyak	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
Amyak	Fvmzr	Ittygran Island (site in Chukotka on ~)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka, on Ittygran Island				Men. 1972, 1975		amyak	amyak	\uc0\u1040 \u1084 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
amyengenghaq	fvqs3sy4f2	mussel shell, small															small mussel shell		< amyak-?-				amyengenghaq	amyengenghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
amyugh-	fvm/4-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > amyughaagh-, amyulqe-, amyuqetagh, amyuutke-																			amyugh-	amyugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
amyughaagh-	fvm/464-	tease (between cousins)		amyughaaghaa \'91he teased her\'92 / amyughaaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  amyughaaghiiq \'91he is teasing someone\'92													to tease (between cousins)		< amyugh-?-				amyughagh-	amyughxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 -\
amyulqe-	fvm/k]2s-	make fun of someone		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 ellngan amyulqumaa ilani \'91he made fun of his partner\'92													to make fun of someone		< amyugh-?-		CK Rub 73		amyulqe-	amyulqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 -\
amyume-	fvm/vs-	waste		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 squander												to waste or squander				CK Rub 73		amyume-	amyume-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 -\
amyuqetagh-	fvm/2snf4-	cruel (be ~)		amyuqetaghtuq \'91he is cruel\'92													to be cruel		< amyugh-ketagh-				amyuqetagh-	amyuqetagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
amyuqetaghta 	fvm/2snf5nf	persecuter		amyuqetaghtengi \'91his persecuters, tormenters\'92	tormenter												persecuter; tormenter		< amyuqetagh-(s)ta				amyuqetaghta 	amyuqetaghta 	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
amyuqetaq	fvm/2snf2	cruel person															cruel person		< amyugh-ketagh-				amyuqetaq	amyuqetaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
amyuutke-	fvm0nrs-	cruel (be ~ to (him) or over (it))															to be cruel to (him) or over (it)		< amyugh-(u)tke-				amyutke-	amyxtke-	\uc0\u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
an'gaghaq	fyuf4f2	nephew of a woman through her brother			niece of a woman through her brother												woman's brother's child; niece of a woman through her brother; nephew of a woman through her brother		PE an(0)!a3(a3)				an'gaghaq	an'gaghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
an'gaghigh-	fyuf4b4-	give gift to newborn baby		
\f2\i perhaps particularly or originally by a woman to her brother's child;
\f0\i0  
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 an\'92gaghaq	gift (give ~ to newborn baby)												to give gift to newborn baby						an'gaghigh-	an'gaghigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
an'gigh-	fyub4-	go be outside to get fresh air		
\f2\i generally said of a child going out for fresh air or to play; 
\f0\i0 an'gightuq \'91he went outside\'92 / an'giitaa \'91he went outside with her (a child, 
\f2\i generally
\f0\i0 )\'92; Upenghami puqlaghhneghani 
\f2\i an\'92giq
\f0\i0  teghignapiglleghhii. \'91In the springtime when it gets warmer 
\f2\i being outdoors
\f0\i0  is fun.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 25)	outside (go or be ~ to get fresh air)												to go or be outside to get fresh air		PE an0!i3- (under PE an0-); < ane-?-				an'gigh-	an'gigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
an'giqragh-	fyub2if4-	outside (be ~ for no real reason)															to be outside for no real reason		< an\'92gigh-krak				an'giqragh-	an'giqragh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1075 \u1080 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1271 -\
anaana 	fy6yf	maternal aunt		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  naa	aunt, maternal												maternal aunt; mother's sister		PE ana(a)na				anana 	anxna 	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u257 \u1085 \u1072 \
anaavag-	fy6dfu-	use a net on a pole to catch birds			catch birds with a net on a pole												to use a net on a pole to catch birds		PE ana(C)uva!				anavag-	anxvag-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u257 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 -\
anaavak 	fy6dfr	net on a pole used for catching birds		
\f2\i like a dipnet	
\f0\i0 basket net for catching birds								compare apaavak \'91fishing hook\'92				net on a pole used for catching birds; basket net for catching birds		PE ana(C)uvak				anavak 	anxvak 	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u257 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
anag-	fyfu-	flee		anagtuq \'91he escaped\'92 / yuuk piyaa anagtuq sikuk iiksayek esnameng \'91the man who was hunting on the ice fled to safety when the shore ice loosened and floated away\'92; qamaglluteng yugi taam kumaqam mangtegham anagtuusimalghiit \'91every one of the occupants of that house that burned escaped\'92	escape												to flee; to escape		PE anna!-				anag-	anag-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 -\
anaggute-	fyf[ens-	mixed up (be ~)		anaggutuq \'91he is mixed up, doing things all wrong\'92	confused (be ~)	wrong (do things ~)											to be mixed up; to be confused; to do things wrong		< anagte-(u)te-				anaggute-	anaggute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
anagh- 	fyf4-	defecate		anaghtuq \'91he defecated\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91it rusted\'92; anaghaa \'91he defecated on it\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91it rusted\'92 /	rust												to defecate; to rust		PE ana3(-)				anagh- 	anagh- 	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
anaghiitaq	fyf47nf2	crosspiece at front of sled															crosspiece at front of sled						anaghitaq	anaghxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
anaghllengiiq	fyf5k]s372	blue fly			fly, blue												blue fly		< anagh-?- (?)				anaghllengiq	anaghllengxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1251 \u1179 \
anaghnigh-	fyf4yb4-	stink			smell spoiled												to stink; to smell spoiled		< anagh-ni\super 2\nosupersub -				anaghnigh-	anaghnigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
anaghtaa-	fyf5n6-	rust		anaghtaaguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  anaghtaagaa \'91it rusted\'92 / anaghtaakaq \'91rusted thing\'92; Iwernga elpesineng katam qilagmi kagpagitek aklungingimeng qayughllak moth-ngituq, 
\f2\i anaghtaangituq
\f0\i0  naafqiiyaghqameng, tegleghniightengituqlu naafqiiluteng teglegughyaghqameng. \'91However store up for yourself treasures in heaven because there are no moths, nor 
\f2\i rust
\f0\i0  to destroy them, nor theives to break in and steal them.\'92 (Matthew 6.20)													to rust		< anagh-?-				anaghta-	anaghtx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 -\
anagnga-	fyfu3f-	incorrect (be ~)		anagngaaq \'91it is incorrect\'92, \'91he is provoked\'92/	wrong (be ~)	provoked (be ~)											to be incorrect; to be wrong; to be provoked		< anagte-nga-				anagnga-	anagnga-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1187 \u1072 -\
anagniigh-	fyfuy74-	fleeing (be in the act of ~)		taghnughhaq anagniightuq qilullghiimeng qikmimeng \'91the child is fleeing from the barking dog\'92; yuuk teglekaq taawa anagniighaquq \'91the man who stole is on the run\'92	escaping (be in the act of  ~)	run (be on the ~)											to be in the act of fleeing or escaping; to be on the run		< anag-niigh-				anagnigh-	anagnxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
anagniighusiq	fgfuy74ecb2	shaman\'92s song for protection and safety		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 song, shaman\'92s, for protection and safety												shaman\'92s song for protection and safety		< anagniigh-(u)siq		CK Rub 73		anagnighusiq	anagnxghusiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
anagrin, anagritaq	fyfuhby. fyfuhbnf2	harness strap for reindeer		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 harness strap for reindeer		< anag-?-(u)n, anag-?-(u)taq		CK Rub 73		anagrin, anagritaq	anagrin, anagritaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1080 \u1085 , \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
anagte-	fyf[ns-	miss the mark		anagtaa \'91he missed it (shooting)\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he confused her\'92 / taghnughhaghmi umyugakek anagsimakek \'91he made his child confused\'92, \'91he irritated his child\'92; anagtaa espalakani \'91he misspelled the word he was spelling\'92; elngaatall yugem anagtaanga \'91the man really irritated me\'92	confuse (get one ~)	irritate (a person)											to miss the mark; to confuse (get one confused); to irritate (a person)		PE an(n)a!-				anagte-	anagte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
anagtii-	fyf[n7-	miss the target		anagtiiguq \'91he missed the target, committed an error, did wrong, broke the law\'92 / anagtiivikaa \'91he hit something other than what one has aimed at\'92; anagtiiviklukek qirgesek sigiqughaak \'91he hit the window unintentionally and broke it\'92; Whanga guullaataquunga, estamaneng unangunga. 
\f2\i Anagtiinghitunga
\f0\i0 . \'91I shot accurately, caught four. I didn\'92t 
\f2\i miss any
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 51)	error (commit an ~)	wrong (do ~)								break the law			to miss the target; to commit an error; to do wrong; to break the law		< anagte-?-				anagti-	anagtx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1251 -\
anagu-	fyfue-	strike with a stick		anawaa \'91he struck it\'92 / anagutaq \'91stick used for striking or beating something\'92; Puughtilghiit tamaakut angwaaghutmeng 
\f2\i anawaaqluki!
\f0\i0  \'91Those who are pretending [to work], 
\f2\i hit them
\f0\i0  with the paddle!\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:156)													to strike with a stick		PE ana!u-				anagu-	anagu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 -\
anagutaq	fyfuenf2	stick used for striking or beating something															stick used for striking or beating something		< anagu-(u)taq				anagutaq	anagutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
anagyaq	fyfumz2	person who seems fated always to escape from dangerous situations		yuggaq taana elngaatall anagyaaguq \'91that little fellow is the sort that always survives\'92	survivor (born ~)												person who seems fated always to escape from dangerous situations; born survivor		< anag-?-				anagyaq	anagyaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
analghu 	fyfk4e	ice floe (large ~)		
\f2\i see item 6 on list in Oozeva et al.
\f0\i0  2004 Oozeva et al. 2004; analghwaaghet \'91small pile of ice\'92	ice that is higher than surroundings	sea ice type											large ice floe; piled ice or pressure ridge higher than surroundings		cf. PI ana3luk \'91imputiry in ice\'92				analghu 	analghu 	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \
anangugh-	fyf3e4-	escape (especially from hardship)		saghligam qikmighani anangughtii uksuum sapeghnaaneng \'91the mother dog helped her puppies escape the harshness of the winter\'92									check; explained as: piyaqliighmeng sameng piyaqnameng alpalghii				to escape (especially from hardship)		< anag-?-		A&W 10		anangugh-	anangugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
anaq 	fyf2	feces		aniighaa \'91he removed the feces or rust from it\'92	rust	excrement											feces; excrement; rust		PE ana3(-)				anaq 	anaq 	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
anaqeltaghaq	fyf2sk]nf4f2	lead shot		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  = anaqeltaq	shot (lead ~)												lead shot		< anaq-? (?)				anaqeltaghaq	anaqeltaghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
anaqeltaq	fyf2sk]nf2	lead shot		= anaqeltaghaq	shot (lead ~)												lead shot		< anaq-? (?)				anaqeltaq	anaqeltaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
anate-	fyfns-	raise		anataa \'91he raised and nurtured him\'92/ saghligaq aqlaghaghllagmi anatikaq avaqutamineng \'91the female dog nurtured her puppies even though it was very cold\'92; teghikusam avaqutateng naten anataqatki? \'91how do wild animals nurture their young?\'92	nurture								check; given as anati, and explained as yugumasti, unguvatilghii				to raise; to nurture				A&W 10		anate-	anate-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ane-	fys-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > aane-, anekestagh-, an\'92gigh-, aningugh-, aninghwaaq															PE an0-				ane-	ane-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 -\
aneghneghiite-	fys4ys47ns-	breath (get out of ~)		aneghneghiituq \'91he got out of breath\'92 / aneghneghiitqaghtunga aqfalighaataghlunga \'91I got out of breath when I ran around\'92													to get out of breath		< aneghneq-(ng)i:ghute-				aneghneghite-	aneghneghxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aneghneghte-	fys4ys5ns-	well (do something that turns out ~, or choose ~)		aneghneghtuq \'91he did something that turned out well\'92; aneghneghtaa he \'91chose it well\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  anighta													to do something that turns out well; to choose well						aneghneghte-	aneghneghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b aneghneq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fys4ys2\super \'a1	\nosupersub breath															breath		PE an03-; < aneghte\super 1\nosupersub -neq\super 2				\nosupersub aneghneq1	aneghneq1	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 1\

\f1\b aneghneq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fys4ys2\super \'99	\nosupersub how things are (the way things are)															the way things are		PE an03- (?); < aneghte\super 2\nosupersub -neq\super 2				\nosupersub aneghneq2	aneghneq2	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 2\
aneghrengi-	fys4hs3b-	pleased (be extremely ~ with a new possession or other thing just obtained)		aneghrengiiq \'91he\'92s pleased with something\'92 / aneghrengitkaa \'91he\'92s pleased with it\'92; 
\f2\i Aneghrengighllak
\f0\i0  elqiighneng. \'91She was 
\f2\i thrilled
\f0\i0  with her visors.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:214); Elngaatall 
\f2\i aneghrengitkemmeng
\f0\i0  tuguluku niivusghaminun kanaghtaa. \'91From being 
\f2\i delighted
\f0\i0  with it she took it and put into her main berry container.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:244)													to be extremely pleased with a new possession or other thing just obtained				VK		aneghrengi-	aneghrengi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 -\

\f1\b aneghte-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fys5ns-\super \'a1	\nosupersub breathe		aneghtuq \'91he breathed\'92; aneghtaa \'91he breathed on it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 aneghte-\super 2\nosupersub  
\f2\i (perhaps ultimately the same morpheme)													
\f0\i0 to breathe		PE an03-				aneghte-1	aneghte-1	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub aneghte-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fys5ns-\super \'99	\nosupersub repeat one\'92s actions		aneghtuq \'91it continued\'92 / Sikiggaq neghellemta neqekragem kagimleghwaaghaneng neghluni riigtemun aglaghluni iteghluni aaneghmini tagiiqluni, tawaten 
\f2\i aneghlleghhiinguq
\f0\i0  esghapagaat. \'91The squirrel was eating bread crumbs where we had eaten earlier, went into her den, came out, and we watched her 
\f2\i repeating her actions
\f0\i0  for some time.\'92 (KALLAG. 98); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 aneghte-\super 1\nosupersub  
\f2\i (perhaps ultimately the same morpheme)	
\f0\i0 continue to be or function as one has												to continue to be or to function as one has; to repeat one\'92s actions		PE an03- (?)				aneghte-2	aneghte-2	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub aneghziig-	fys4p7u-	exhale softly, slowly and deeply		yughaghtem aapghaa Kiyaghneghemnguq yuuk ulimayuggaaghyamigu aneghziigluku qengagkenkun unguvaghtestekaqeftaa \'91the preacher tells us that God had breathed into the nostrils of the first man when he created him, and made him alive\'92													to exhale softly, slowly and deeply		< aneghte\super 1\nosupersub -?-				aneghzig-	aneghzxg-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1079 \u1251 \u1075 -\
anekestagh-	fysrscnf4-	crawl out quietly to the open space 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R) 									
\f0\i0 check gloss and vowel lengths				to crawl out quietly to the open space 	nb[j ds[jlbnm. dsktpfnm jnrelf-kb,j yf ekbwe. yf ghjcnjh	< ane-?-		Rub. 79		anekestagh-	anekestagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
anengaq	fys3f2	brother, older (specifically of male)		
\f2\i strictly speaking this is the older brother of a male while the older brother of a female is 
\f0\i0 kugeq													older brother (specifically of male)		PE an0&a3				anengaq	anengaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \
aneq	fys2	ember															ember		PY-S an0q				aneq	aneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aneraaghinaq	fysh64byf2	putrifying thing		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				putrifying thing	nkt/obq			Rub. 80		aneraghinaq	anerxghinaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
ang	f3	here, take it		
\f2\i particle; said when handing something to someone													
\f0\i0 here, take it		PE a(a)&				ang	ang	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \
Angaayu	F36/	Oongayuk Hill on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Oongayuk Hill on St. Lawrence Is.						Angayu	Angxyu	\uc0\u1040 \u1187 \u257 \u1102 \
angaghqe-	f3f52s-	convey		angaghquq \'91he took something along\'92 /	take along	transport											to convey; to take along; to transport		PY-S a&a3-				angaghqe-	angaghqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
angaghqugh-	f3f52e4-	transporting (keep on ~ things)		angaghqughtuq \'91he keeps on transporting things\'92; angaghqughii \'91he keeps on transporting them\'92 /													to keep on transporting things		<  angaghqe-ugh-				angaghqugh-	angaghqugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
angaghquusiq	f3f528cb2	conveyance															conveyance		< angaghqu-(u)siq				angaghqusiq	angaghqxsiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
angak	f3fr	uncle, maternal			maternal uncle												maternal uncle; mother's brother		PE a&a!				angak	angak	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \
angalke-	f3fk]rs-	jerk on a tether or other restraint to get free		
\f2\i of animals or small children mainly;
\f0\i0  angalkuq \'91it jerked at the tether, one holding it, etc.\'92 / taghnughhaq naaminun angalkuq \'91the child jerked at its mother\'92													to jerk on a tether or other restraint to get free		PY-S a&aq0-				angalke-	angalke-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1099 -\
angalqaaq	f3fk]262	game of some sort		
\f2\i exact details undetermined									
\f0\i0 details?				game of some sort						angalqaq	angalqxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u257 \u1179 \
angalqataasiq	f3fk]2fn6cb2	hook for retrieving seals or birds		
\f2\i may be used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 angalqataasit, 
\f2\i for a single complete device	
\f0\i0 sling for hunting												hook for retrieving seals or birds; sling for hunting					< angalqatagh-(u)siq	angalqatasiq	angalqatxsiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
angalqatagh-	f3fk]2fnf4-	hook a caught seal to retrieve it		unangkaqa angalqataghluku tugaaqa \'91with a seal hook I retrieved the seal that I had shot\'92													to hook a caught seal to retrieve						angalqatagh-	angalqatagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b angalqataq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f3fk]2fnf2\'a1	white wagtail			wagtail, white	
\f2\i Motacilla alba											
\f0\i0 white wagtail (Motacilla alba)						angalqataq1	angalqataq1	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b angalqataq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f3fk]2fnf2\super \'99	\nosupersub hook for retrieving seals or birds		
\f2\i may be used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 angalqataq, 
\f2\i for a single complete device; 
\f0\i0 \'91sling\'92 
\f2\i meaning questioned; the device is pear-shaped, made of wood, approximately 1-1/2 feet long, 1/2 foot in diameter, and has several barbless hooks protruding from the sides; 
\f0\i0 angalqatat tagivaghten aagayupigtut \'91the seal retrieving hook you gave me goes far when thrown\'92	sling for hunting												hook for retrieving seals or birds; sling for hunting						angalqataq2	angalqataq2	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 2\
anganga	f3f3f	ouch!		
\f2\i child's expression when hurt													
\f0\i0 ouch!						anganga	anganga	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \
angangarquq	f3f3fi2e2	ankle bone		= aanngerquq													ankle bone						angangarquq	angangarquq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1096 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
angatugh-	f3fne4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > angatughqe-, angatumeng																			angatugh-	angatugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
angatughqe-	f3fne52s-	hurry over		angatughqaa (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  angatughqutkaa) \'91she hurried over it\'92 / angatughqumakek aghnam kaamgek angyaghvagilgan ugini the woman \'91hurriedly sewed her husband's skin boots before he went out hunting\'92													to hurry over (it) (especially at sewing)	ltkfnm xnj-k chjxyj	< angatugh-?-		CK V & E 133 (Russ voc)		angatughqe-	angatughqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
angatumeng	f3fnevs3	long time (for a ~ yet)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  angatumeng kaannaanghituq usiista \'91the supply ship won't be here for a long time yet\'92; angatumeng pinghitem estugaq umegtuq \'91because of not acting without delay (i.e. because of (our) delay) the store  closed (before we could go there)\'92	delay (without ~)												for a long time yet; without delay		< angatugh-
\f2\i abl.-mod.		
\f0\i0 Akiingqwaghneghet 114		angatumeng	angatumeng	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \
angayuqaghqaq	f3f/2f52f2	stepparent			foster-parent	adoptive parent								parent (step, foster of adoptive)			step, foster or adoptive parent		< angayuqaq-kaq		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 147		angayuqaghqaq	angayuqaghqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
angayuqaq	f3f/2f2	parent			boss												parent; boss		PE a7ayuq(q)a3 (under PE a&ayu!)				angayuqaq	angayuqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
angayuqiilnguq*	f3f/27k3e2	orphan															orphan		< anayuqaq-(ng)ite-nguq				angayuqilnguq*	angayuqxlnguq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1102 \u1179 \u1251 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
ange-	f3s-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0  > aange-, angeneq, angeyeghaq, angli-, angkaliigh-, anglegun, angtala, angtaaq, angtughhaq, angtughpak, angvigagh-															PE a&0-				ange-	ange-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1099 -\
angegh-	f3s4-	affirm		angeghtuq \'91he said "yes"\'92; aangghaa \'91he said "yes" to her\'92 / aangghutaa \'91he said "yes" about it or for her\'92; aangghutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  agreed with each other\'92; Aapsamkun 
\f2\i angeghtuq
\f0\i0 . \'91When I asked him, he 
\f2\i said \'93yes\'94
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 27)	assent	agree								yes (say \'93~\'94)			to affirm; to assent; to agree; to say "yes"		PE a&03- (entry apparently lost from CED)				angegh-	angegh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1271 -\
angeghpayug-	f3s5gf/u-	perk up		angeghpayugtuq \'91he perked up\'92; angeghpayugtukut nagaqughluta aangqaghteput kayaalqiimaniluki \'91we perked up hearing that our ball players had won\'92; angeghpayugnapigtuq pinitun pinghata \'91it perks one up when they do well\'92; taaghtam pinighningatni angeghpayugtuq \'91he perked up when the doctor told him he was okay\'92	revived, strengthened and encouraged (feel ~)								check; explained as: qaqayuugta				to perk up; to feel revived, strengthened and encouraged		< angegh-?-		A&W 11		angeghpayug-	angeghpayug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 -\
angeghqe-	f3s52s-	agree upon			approve of												to agree upon; to approve of		< angegh-?-		CK Rub 87 CK 		angeghqe-	angeghqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
angeghquusiq	f3s528cb2	transportation (means of ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 stretcher								Rub. has a more basic verbal form too, angeghquute- -- check these				means of transportation; stretcher	chtlcndj gthtldb;tybzyjcbkrb	< angaghqe-ugh-(u)siq		Rub. 88		angeghqusiq	angeghqxsiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
angeghrugneq	f3s4heuys2	determined person		angeghrugneghuuq \'91he is a determined, persistent person\'92; angeghrugneghutminek qenwat ullghitagni naallukek tugaak \'91being a determined person he paid for his snow-machine and took it\'92	persistent person								check for a verb base; explained as: sagiqneq, taaqunnaqneq sameng pinaqneq, which VK translates as \'91determined person, one who is determined to get things done\'92				determined person; persistent person		< angeghrugte-neq\super 2		\nosupersub A&W 11		angeghrugneq	angeghrugneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
angeghrugte-	f3s4he[ns-	determined (be a ~ person)		aneghrugtuq \'91he is a determined person\'92													to be a determined person		< angegh-?-				angeghrugte-	angeghrugte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
angeneq, aangeneq	f3sys2. 63sys2	bigger one		angengha 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aangengha \'91the one larger than it\'92; angenghat 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aangenghat \'91the largest one of them\'92	larger one												bigger one; larger one		< ange-neq\super 2\nosupersub , aange-neq\super 2				\nosupersub angeneq, angeneq	angeneq, xngeneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 , \u257 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Angetequq	F3sns2e2	former village west of Cape Stoletia in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village west of Cape Stoletia in Chukotka		< ?-quq (?)				Angetequq	Angetequq	\uc0\u1040 \u1187 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
angeyaghaq	f3sz4f2	orphan bull walrus			walrus (orphan bull ~)												orphan bull walrus				SLI Cur. Man. 59		angeyaghaq	angeyaghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
angeyeghaq	f3sqs4f2	rogue walrus that eats other walruses and seals		
\f2\i said to be a walrus that had been orphaned when young													
\f0\i0 rogue walrus that eats other walruses and seals		< ange-?-				angeyeghaq	angeyeghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
angghuraq	f34ehf2	noose made from rope		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 noose made from rope				CK Rub 82		angghuraq	angghuraq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
anghungite-	fy4e3bns-	eat greedily		Ilangi yugem neghluteng 
\f2\i anghungitut
\f0\i0 . \'91Some people 
\f2\i eat very fast
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 25)	gobble food	use things up fast											to eat greedily; to gobble food; to use things up fast	;flysq	cf. PE an(0)3uta3		CK V & E 131 (Russ voc)		anghungite-	anghungite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
angi-	f3b-	come undone		angiiq \'91it came undone\'92 / aghnaghaghhaam taqughtekek angiik \'91the little girl's braids came undone\'92; angituq \'91it came loose, came undone\'92; angitaa \'91he undid it\'92	undone (come ~)	unravel								unfastened (come ~)			to come undone; to unravel; to come unfastened		PE a&i-				angi-	angi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1080 -\
angighhe-	f3b5s-	smear		angighhuq \'91he spread something onto something or onto himself, he applied lotion\'92; angighhaa \'91he spread something onto it\'92 / angighhegkaq \'91something that has been painted or has had something spread on it\'92; Angyaghput kineghnaghsimaluku 
\f2\i angighhnaqaqa
\f0\i0 . \'91I\'92m going to 
\f2\i paint
\f0\i0  our boat while it\'92s favorable for things to dry.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 27)	rub in	spread								paint			to smear; to rub in; to spread; to paint						angighhe-	angighhe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1099 -\
angighhwaagh-	f3b5164-	spread (paint, ointment, etc.) especially repeatedly over a small area		angighhwaaghaaa \'91he applied something to it over and over again\'92; qezigni angighhwaaghaqeftaak lipstick-meng \'91she applied lipstick to her lips\'92; aghangi angighhwaaghutkayuguftut \'91her medication has to be rubbed in\'92	apply (paint, ointment, etc.) especially repeatedly over a small area												to spread (paint, ointment, etc.) especially repeatedly over a small area		< angighhe-?-		A&W 11		angighhwagh-	angighhwxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
angighte-	f3b5ns-	warm (become ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to become warm	yfuhtdfncz			CK V & E 178		angighte-	angighte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
angiite-	f37ns-	arrive on time		angiituq \'91he finished or arrived on time\'92; angiitaa \'91he finished it on time\'92 / tengegkayugnun aangiituq \'91he arrived in time to catch the plane\'92; angiitaak atkuyaaghegni \'91she finished her dress on time\'92	finish on time	on time (arrive or finish ~)								time (arriver or finish on ~)			to arrive on time; to finish on time	ecgtdfnm cltkfnm djdhtvz	PE a&it-		CK V & E 133  (Russ voc)		angite-	angxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
angilaagh-, angitaagh-	f3bk64-. f3bn64-	calm (water is ~ in a cove)															for water to be calm in a cover				VK\'92s notes		angilagh-, angitxgh-	angilxgh-, angitxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u257 \u1271 -, \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
angiqe-	f3b2s-	undo		angiqaa \'91he undid it\'92 /	untie	unravel											to undo; to untie; to unravel		< angi-?-				angiqe-	angiqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
angka-	f3rf-	size (be a certain ~)		\'85 galvanize-et sangwaat egllukaghqaghllaget entaqun whaten plywood-estun 
\f2\i angkalghiit
\f0\i0 . \'91\'85 sheets of galvanized metal for stoves 
\f2\i the size
\f0\i0  of sheets of plywood.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:70); Aghsaghmesaghtuuq forty-five-cents-an-hour, iwernga tawaten 
\f2\i angkayaghtuq
\f0\i0 . \'91It wasn\'92t much, 45 cents an hour [the pay], however 
\f2\i that\'92s how much it was
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:82); Tawaten 
\f2\i angkaniluku
\f0\i0  aapqaat. \'91They say it 
\f2\i was that size
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:2)													to be a certain size		< ange-?-				angka-	angka-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1082 \u1072 -\
angkaliigh-	f3rfk74-	become the size of something		Aghnalqwaaghhaq qenwat iiggestun 
\f2\i angkaliightuq
\f0\i0 . \'91Then the little old lady 
\f2\i became the size of
\f0\i0  a hand.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 38)													to become the size of something		< angka-?-				angkaligh-	angkalxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
anglaaq	f3k92	hole made for ice-fishing			ice-fishing hole												hole made for ice-fishing		PE anlu(C)a3 (under PE anlu); < anglu-?-				anglaq	anglxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
anglaminagh-	f3kfvbyf4-	beautiful (be ~)		
\f2\i for example, the tundra in spring	
\f0\i0 colorful (be ~)												to be beautiful or colorful	rhfcbdsq. gtcnhsq	PY-S a&la-		CK V & E 128		anglaminagh-	anglaminagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
anglanagh-	f3kzyf4-	beautiful (be ~ (of sounds))		qawaagem ulunga anglanaghtuq \'91the song of the bird is beautiful\'92	delightful to hear (be ~)												to be beautiful (of sounds); to be delightful to hear		PY-S a&la-				anglanagh-	anglanagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
anglaq	f3kz2	wish		anglagka waran palaghtikek \'91at least temporarily grant my wish\'92	desire												wish; desire		PY-S a&la-				anglaq	anglaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \
anglegun, angleguta	f3ksuey. fyksuenf	sibling															sibling		< ange-lgun				anglegun, angleguta	anglegun, angleguta	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 , \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
anglegutkaghqaq	f3ksuenrf52f2	step-sibling			half-sibling	sibling, step or half											step-sibling; half-sibling		< anglegun-kaghqaq				anglegutkaghqaq	anglegutkaghqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b angli-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f3kb-\super \'a1	\nosupersub grow		angliiq \'91he or it grew\'92 / anglingllaghaa \'91he raised it or her\'92; Ighneqa 
\f2\i angliiq
\f0\i0  elngaatall ayumiqulleghmi ukani. \'91My son 
\f2\i is growing
\f0\i0  so much this year.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 27); Yuuk taana 
\f2\i anglistaat
\f0\i0  igaghtemeng kaangqumun. \'91That 
\f2\i are promoting
\f0\i0  that man from teacher to principal.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 28)	big (become ~)												to grow; to become big		< ange-(gh/l)i-			; > anglinasug-, anglinghhaq, anglisaghaq, anglinaasiq, anglisaghta	angli-1	angli-1	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub angli-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f3kb-\super \'99																\nosupersub to make a hole in the ice		< anglu-li-				angli-2	angli-2	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 -\super 2\
\nosupersub anglii-	f3k7-	make a hole for ice-fishing															to make a hole for ice-fishing		< anglaaq-li-		VK		angli-	anglx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1251 -\
anglime-	f3kbvs-	spectacular (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E); questioned	
\f0\i0 resounding (be ~)												to be spectacular; to be resounding	phtkboysq\\ pdjyrbq			CK V & E 128		anglime-	anglime-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1099 -\
anglinaasiq	f3kby6cb2	edible plant (a certain kind of ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined	
\f0\i0 plant (a certain kind of edible ~)								used also on SLI?				a certain of kind of edible plant		< angli-?-(u)siq				anglinasiq	anglinxsiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
anglinasug-	f3kbyfc/u-	grow slowly															to grow slowly		< angli-?-				anglinasug-	anglinasug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
anglinghhaq	f3kby5f2	young man or woman															young man or woman		< angli-nghhaq				anglinghhaq	anglinghhaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
anglisaalgun	f3kbc9kuey	agemate		anglisaalgutkullghiit qerngaghmeng igaataqut \'91the who are of the same age go to school together\'92; anglisaalgutkullghiik angelgutkullghiistun kiyaghtuk \'91the two who grew up together are like siblings\'92	contemporary	peer							explained as angligutkullghiit; atunem yugututkallghiit	grow up (one with whom one has grown up)			agemate; contemporary; peer; one with whom one has grown up		< angli-?-lgun				anglisalgun	anglisxlgun	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
anglisaghaq	f3kbcz4f2	stepchild			adopted child	foster-child								child (step, adopted, or foster ~)			stepchild; adopted child; foster-child		< angli-sagh-aq				anglisaghaq	anglisaghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
anglisaghta	f3kbcz5nf	step-parent			adoptive parent	foster-parent								father who raises child without the mother			step-parent; adoptive parent; foster parent; father who raises child without the mother		< angli-sagh-ta				anglisaghta	anglisaghta	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
anglivik	f3kbdbr	motherland		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 motherland	hjlbyf	< angli-vik		Rub. 84		anglivik	anglivik	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
anglu	f3k/	seal breathing hole in ice			hole (seal breathing ~ in ice)												seal breathing hole in ice		PE a&lu				anglu	anglu	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \
angmeghaq	f3vs4f2	whale type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 whale type				SLI Cur. Man. 59		angmeghaq	angmeghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
angqa	f32f	hip 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 thigh	person from a house located to the side (of this one or of ours)											hip; thigh; person from a house located to the side (of this one or of ours)				CK Rub 84		angqa	angqa	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \
angqapegtaq	f32fgs[nf2	rock, spherical															spherical rock		< angqaq-?		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 142		angqapegtaq	angqapegtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
angqaperuk	f32fgsher	round thing		Nuna una 
\f2\i angqaperukegtaq
\f0\i0  aangqastun. \'91This earth is 
\f2\i round
\f0\i0  like a ball.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 125)	circle	sphere											round thing; circle; sphere		< angqaq\super 1\nosupersub -peruk				angqaperuk	angqaperuk	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \

\f1\b angqaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f32f2\super \'a1			
\f2\i \nosupersub root; 
\f0\i0 > aangqagh-, aangqaq, aangqanneq, aangqasiigh-, angqaperuk, angqighaq															PY-S a&qaq				angqaq1	angqaq1	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b angqaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f32f2\super \'99	\nosupersub height		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 < ange-qaq (?)	size												height; size				CK Rub 84		angqaq2	angqaq2	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 2\
angqigh-	f32b4-	pain (be in ~)		= aqngigh- 
\f2\i (q.v. for derived forms)													
\f0\i0 to be in pain		PE at&i3-				angqigh-	angqigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1080 \u1271 -\
angqighaq	f32b4f2	game played with a ball															game played with a ball	buhf d vzx	< angqaq\super 1\nosupersub -ligh-aq				angqighaq	angqighaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
angtaaq	f3n62	bearded seal, mature			seal (mature bearded ~)	
\f2\i Erignathus barbatus 
\f0\i0 (bearded seal) mature											mature bearded seal 
\f2\i (Erignathus barbatus)		
\f0\i0 PE a&tu3(a3) (under PE a&0-); < ang0-tu-aq				angtaq	angtxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b angtala\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f3nfkz\super s	\nosupersub size		angtalnga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  angtalanga \'91its size\'92													size		< ange-tala				angtalae	angtalae	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
angtalgun	f3nfkuey	agemate		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 person of the same age												person of the same age; agemate	cdthcnybr\'f8wf\uc0\u960 . hjdtcybr\'f8wf\u960  	< ange-ta-lgun		Rub. 86		angtalgun	angtalgun	\u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
angtaliite-	f3nfk7ns-	grow to full size															to grow to full size		< angtala-(u)te-				angtalite-	angtalxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
angtughhaq	f3ne5f2	grey whale			whale (grey ~)	
\f2\i Eschrichtius robustus											
\f0\i0 grey whale (Eschrichtius robustus)		< ang0-tu-ghhaq				angtughhaq	angtughhaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
angtughpak	f3ne5gfr	walrus bull			bull walrus												bull walrus		< ang0-tu-ghpak				angtughpak	angtughpak	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
angtughte-	f3ne5ns-	catch something (game) that is big		angtughtaa \'91he caught it (something big)\'92 / kaviiq angtughsimakanga naaptani \'91he caught a big fox in his snare\'92; kayutani angtughsimakangi \'91he caught a big fish\'92									explore the grammar of the examples; entry explained as: aangelghiimeng sakengelghii, which VK translates as \'91getting something realy big in size\'92				to catch something (game) that is big		< ange-tu-?-te\super 2\nosupersub -		A&W 11		angtughte-	angtughte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
angu-	f3e-	overtake		angwaa \'91he caught up with it \'91/ angwaaqaa \'91he is catching up with it\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he regularly catches up with it\'92	catch up with												to overtake; to catch up with		PE a&u-			> anguugh-, angulegh-, angumaasqitaghte-, angumaaskitaagh-, Angutughvik	angu-	angu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 -\
angufqaghte-	f3ea2f5ns-	stormbound (be ~)		angufqaghtaa \'91he got weathered in\'92; Sivungaghtaayalghiit angufqaghlluki Tapghukun tamlagumalghiit \'91they were going to Savoonga but got stormbound and went ashore at Tapghuq\'92; uksaaghmi imaghllugtughhneghmini angufqaghtaghnaghtaqaa \'91in fall it is common to get stormbound when traveling on the rough sea\'92	weathered in (be ~)								check; explained as: navek piguyalghiit eslam aghuliightekii, which VK translates as \'91being stormbound\'92				to be stormbound; to be weathered in		< angu-?-		A&W 11		angufqaghte-	angufqaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1092 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
angukaq	f3erf2	dwarf fireweed		
\f2\i eaten raw alone or with blubber and meat, or put into barrels to ferment along with other greens	Epilobium latifolium	
\f0\i0 river beauty (plant)								fireweed, dwarf			dwarf fireweed; river beauty (plant)
\f2\i  (Epilobium latifolium (or Chamaenerion latifolium))		
\f0\i0 PY a&ukaq				angukaq	angukaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
anguksag-	f3erczu-	get caught in a storm while traveling		anguksagaa \'91he encountered him unexpectedly\'92 / uughqanun piit angyat anguksagumayaqangi eslam iwernga kaasimaniit \'91those who were going to the south side of the island got caught in the storm but managed to arrive\'92; nelliqelghiit anguksagluki tugulaamakangit \'91they dealt those who were being mischeivous and took them\'92; eslam seghleghem anguksagii \'91bad weather caught up with them\'92; ighaghviluk anguksakaqaq naafqestegpenaan \'91I was at the old school before they tore it down\'92	deal with mischievous people	encounter unexpectedly							check (but maybe it all fits); explained and translated as: 1) esla naavelghii navek pinguluki \'91when it gets stormy when one is traveling\'92, 2) samaluki angukangit \'91having to reach those who are doing mischievous things\'92 ???	be at a place or time while something is still there			to get caught in a storm while traveling; to deal with mischievous people; to encounter unexpectedly; to be at a place or time while something is still there		< angu-?-		A&W 11		anguksag-	anguksag-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 -\
angulegh-	f3eks4-	waves overtake one		angulghaa \'91it (the wave) overtook him\'92 / Esnighqwaghlunga 
\f2\i angulghaanga
\f0\i0 . \'91The waves reached me while I was beachcombing.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 28)													for waves to overtake one		< angu-?-				angulegh-	angulegh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
angulgha-	f3ek4f-	move slow (of liquid, especially the tide)															to move slow (of liquid, especially the tide)		< angulegh-?-				angulgha-	angulgha-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 -\
angumaaghwagh-	f3ev641f4-	linger in one\'92s poor condition without improvement		tawatelluni angumaaghwaghtuq \'91he stayed in the same condition\'92; paninang imaghlliilqa angumaaghwaghaquq \'91I still feel uneasy from my trip where there was a lot of motion\'92; qinuyuwaaq paninang angumaaghwam entaqun \'91he is still not feeling well from being sick\'92	continue as is (of person or condition)								check; explained as naallghunneghlliqelghii, nagneghwaaq, which VK translates as \'91something that lingers, something that doesn\'92t get better for a while\'92				to linger in one\'92s poor condition without improvement; to continue as is (of person or condition)		< angu-(u)ma-		A&W11		angumaghwagh-	angumxghwagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u257 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
angumaasitaagh-	f3ev6cbn64-	search for something lost			put effort in order to take, gather, eat, etc. more than others												to search for something lost; to put effort in order to take, gather, eat, etc. more than others		< angu-(u)ma-?-				angumasitagh-	angumxsitxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
angumaaskitaagh-	f3ev6crbn64-	hurry in order to not miss something or to finished in time		angyaalgutkaghaat angumaaskitaaghteki igleghalgukaghaat \'91hurry up and get ready so we can go hunting with the other boat that is going\'92									check; explained as pinaqragkiiq, sangwaa pivagilgan, which VK translates as \'91trying to do something fast before something that is scheduled begins\'92				to hurry in order to not miss something or to finished in time		< angu-?-		A&W 12		angumaskitagh-	angumxskitxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u257 \u1089 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
angumaasqitaghte-	f3ev6c2bnf5ns-	delayed (be ~)															to be delayed		< angu-(u)ma-?-				angumasqitaghte-	angumxsqitaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u257 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
angumake-	f4evfrs-	catch up with a person		aghulaqnaqelghii angumakaa \'91he got there before she left, caught up with the one about to leave\'92; angumakenghitaa \'91he missed it/her\'92	get to an event before it is over												to catch up with a person; to get to an event before it is over		< angu-(u)ma-ke-				angumake-	angumake-	\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
angumatkenghite-	f3evfnrsy4bns-	miss (as by not get somewhere in time for something)		tuyughivigkaqa angumakenghitaqa aghulaqumalghii  \'91I missed the onewith whom I was going to send a package since he\'92d already gone\'92; nunmaagmetutmineng angumakumangisimakangi angyaghnaqet \'91he is so slow in getting ready that the boat that he had been going to go hunting with had already gone\'92									check; explained as: nuughtughaqa, which VK translates as \'91having to miss (not getting there on time)\'92				to miss (as by not getting somewhere in time for something)		< angu-(u)ma-(u)tke-nghite-		A&W 12		angumatkenghite-	angumatkenghite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
anguneq	f3eys2	stitches, inner and outer on boat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 inner and outer stitches on skin boat				CK Rub 87		anguneq	anguneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Angutughvik	F3ene4dbr	July		
\f2\i said to mean literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time of plant gathering\'92 (
\f2\i perhaps from 
\f0\i0 angukaq 
\f2\i (q.v.)); also given in various sources as 
\f0\i0 June 
\f2\i and 
\f0\i0 August													July		< angu-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -vik				Angutughvik	Angutughvik	\uc0\u1040 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
anguugh-	f384-	stormbound (be ~)		anguughtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  anguughaa \'91he is stormbound or otherwise delayed\'92 /	delayed by unforeseen circumstances (be ~)												to be stormbound; to be delayed by unforeseen circumstances		< angu-ugh- (?)				angugh-	angxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1263 \u1271 -\
anguyak	f3ezr	enemy		anguyaga aghulaqumaaq \'91his enemy left\'92; mekelghiiq taana anguyakaa \'91that boy is her enemy\'92													enemy		PE a&uya!(-)				anguyak	anguyak	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1103 \u1082 \
anguyiqe-	f3eqb2s-	pick a fight		anguyiquq \'91he picked a fight\'92 / anguyiqutkaa \'91he picked a fight over it\'92	fight (pick a ~)												to pick a fight		< anguyak-liqe-				anguyiqe-	anguyiqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1253 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
angvagneq	f3dfuys2	spoiled person			overprotected person	sorry for himself (one who feels ~)								person, spoiled or overprotected			spoiled person; overprotected person; one who feels sorry for himself		< angvagte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub angvagneq	angvagneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
angvagte-	f3df[ns-	overreact to discomfort or pain		Mekelghiighhaq ggutangighluni 
\f2\i angvagtaquq
\f0\i0 . \'91After he lost a tooth, the boy 
\f2\i made a fuss
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 28)	spoiled (act ~)	act spoiled								feel sorry for oneself and show it 			to overreact to discomfort or pain; to act spoiled; to feel sorry for oneself and show it 		< ange-vag-?- (?)				angvagte-	angvagte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1074 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
angvalluqegtaq	f3dfk]/2s[nf2	oval thing		uyghaghmeng angvalluqegtameng saghnamaanga \'91I picked up a large oval rock\'92	big thing												oval thing; big thing		< ange-vag-lluk-kegtaq (?)				angvalluqegtaq	angvalluqegtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
angvaneq	f3dfys2	hollow behind or under shoulder blade and above collar bone			shoulder blade (hollow behind or under ~ and above collar bone)	collar bone (hollow behind or under shoulder blade and above ~)											hollow behind or under shoulder blade and above collar bone		PE a&va-				angvaneq	angvaneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1074 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
angvigagh-	f3dbuf4-	tall (be a ~ person)		angvigaghtuq \'91he is tall\'92 / angvigapigtuq \'91he is very tall\'92; angvigaghtuq whangamneng \'91he is taller than me\'92	taller (be ~)												to be tall (of a person); to be taller		< ange-?-				angvigagh-	angvigagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
angwaagh-	f3164-	paddle (a boat)		angwaaghtuq \'91he is paddling\'92 /													to paddle		PE a&u9a3-				angwagh-	angwxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
angwaaghta	f3165nf	paddler															paddler		< angwaagh-(s)ta				angwaghta	angwxghta	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
angwaaghun	f3164ey	paddle															paddle		PE a&u9a3un (under PE a&u9ar-); < angwaagh-(u)n				angwaghun	angwxghun	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
angyaataghqe-	f3m9nf52s-	eat boating food															to eat boating food		< angyaataq-?-				angyataghqe-	angyxtaghqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
angyaataq	f3m9nf2	food for use on boat trip		Estugaghmeng 
\f2\i angyaataghqangunga
\f0\i0 . \'91I got some 
\f2\i food for the trip
\f0\i0  from the store.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 29); angyaatat puyguyaqunaki \'91don\'92t forget the food for the journey\'92	boating food	provisions											food for use on boat trip; provisions		< angyagh-(u)taq				angyataq	angyxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
angyagh-	f3mz4-	boat (use a ~, travel by ~, hunt with a ~)			use a boat	travel by boat								hunt with a boat	 		to use a boat; to travel by boat; to hunt with a boat		PY a&yaq				angyagh-	angyagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
angyaghllug-	f3mz5k]/u-	use an ice floe as a makeshift raft to cross open water		angyaghllugtuq \'91he crossed with a makeshift icefloe raft\'92	cross open water using an ice floe												to use an ice floe as a makeshift raft to cross open water		< angyagh-lluk		A&W 12		angyaghllug-	angyaghllug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
angyaghnak	f3mz4yfr	boat, very big															very big boat		< angyaq-?-		VK		angyaghnak	angyaghnak	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
angyaghnaq	f3mz4yf2	good weather for hunting by boat (be ~)															for there to be good weather for hunting by boat		< angyagh-naq				angyaghnaq	angyaghnaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
angyaghniigh-	f3mz4y74-	hunt with a boat		
\f2\i Angyaghniiq
\f0\i0  taaqenghani qeghaqaq uglapigtaqelghii. \'91When the 
\f2\i season for hunting by boat
\f0\i0  is over there\'92s lots of work to be done.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 29)	ask for a boat	boat (hunt with or ask for ~)											to hunt with a boat; to ask for a boat		< angyagh-niigh-				angyaghnigh-	angyaghnxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
angyaghpak	f3mz5gfr	ship															ship		< angyaq-ghpak				angyaghpak	angyaghpak	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
angyaghqaq	f3mz52f2	boat building material			material for building a boat												boat building material		< angyaq-kaq				angyaghqaq	angyaghqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
angyaghugh-	f3mz4e4-	boat trip (take an unplanned ~ or side-trip)			take an unplanned boat trip or side-trip												to take an unplanned boat trip or side-trip		< angyagh-?-				angyaghugh-	angyaghugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1271 -\
angyaghut	f3mz4en	boats, more than one		
\f2\i this is a plural;  apparently used when plural. 
\f0\i0 angyat
\f2\i , could be taken as indicating a single boat and crew; 
\f0\i0 Agigutenkut taakut angyat Guwiingenkut angyaghut. \'91There were boats with crews Agigun\'92s and Guwiinga, 
\f2\i more than one
\f0\i0  boat.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:62) 													more than one boat		< angyaq-?-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 angyaghut	angyaghut	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \
angyaghvigllak	f3mz4db[k]zr	time of the great legendary flood			flood (the time of the great legendary ~)												the time of the great legendary flood		< angyagh-vik-ghllak				angyaghvigllak	angyaghvigllak	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
angyaghwaaq	f3mz4162	boat (old-time wooden whaling ~)			wooden whaling boat, old-time												old-time wooden whaling boat		< angyaq-(ghw/ngw/w) aaq				angyaghwaq	angyaghwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
angyalegtaq	f3mzks[nf2	boat owner or captain			captain of boat												boat owner; boat captain		< angyaq-lek-?				angyalegtaq	angyalegtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
angyalek	f3mzksr	boat owner			captain	owner of boat											boat owner; captain		< angyaq-lek				angyalek	angyalek	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
angyallek	f3mzk]sr	good boatsman			boatsman, good												good boatsman		< angyagh-llek				angyallek	angyallek	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \
angyalligh-	f3mzk]b4-	steer a boat		angyallightuq \'91he's steering\'92 /													to steer a boat		< angyagh-?-				angyalligh-	angyalligh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
angyallighta	f3mzk]b5nf	captain															captain		< angyalligh-(s)ta				angyallighta	angyallighta	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
angyalliq	f3mzk]b2	back of boat where captain sits															back of boat where captain sits		< angyaq-?				angyalliq	angyalliq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
angyangestaq	f3mz3scnf2	boat, small, used for hunting birds		= angyengestaq													small boat used for hunting birds		< angyaq-ngestaq				angyangestaq	angyangestaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
angyapik	f3mzgbr	skin boat			boat (traditional skin ~)												traditional skin boat		< angyaq-pik				angyapik	angyapik	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
angyaq	f3mz2	boat, 
\f2\i especially
\f0\i0 , open skin boat															boat, 
\f2\i especially
\f0\i0 , open skin boat		PY a&yaq				angyaq	angyaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
Angyat	F3]zn	Vngyat Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Vngyat Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Angyat	Angyat	\uc0\u1040 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1090 \
angyavak	f3mzdfr	large boat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 boat, large								reasonable, but check whether used on SLI				large boat	,jkmifz ,fqlfhf	< angyaq-vak		Rub. 88		angyavak	angyavak	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
angyeghetaq	f3qs4snf2	food for use on boat trip		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  angyeghetat, 
\f2\i for a set of such emergency supplies; 
\f0\i0 neqekragmeng angyeghetameng tunqughiinkut taan\'92gani \'91he gave us pilot bread taken from the emergency supplies\'92	boating food	provisions							check; explained as angyamun kelqutaaghet quunpeng sangwaat neqet, aatkat, atughqat wetku salghiini, which VK translates as \'91a bag of clothes and food that is always (?) when going hunting by boat to be used when in need of them\'92	emergency clothes and food carried in a boat			food for use on boat trip; provisions; emergency clothes and food carried in a boat		< angyagh-(u)taq (?)		VK		angyeghetaq	angyeghetaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
angyeghnak	f3qs4yfr	alaska blackfish
\f2\i  			
\f0\i0 blackfish (Alaska ~)	
\f2\i Dallia pectoralis											
\f0\i0 alaska blackfish
\f2\i  (Dallia pectoralis)						
\f0\i0 angyeghnak	angyeghnak	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
angyengestaq	f3qs3scnf2	boat, small, used for hunting birds		= angyangestaq													small boat used for hunting birds		< angyaq-ngestaq				angyengestaq	angyengestaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
angyi-	f3qb-	make a boat			play under an overturned boat (of an animal)												to make a boat; to play under an overturned boat (of an animal)		< angyaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -				angyi-	angyi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1080 -\
angyii-	f3q7-	hover over something		
\f2\i usually of birds but figuratively of people; 
\f0\i0 angyiiguq \'91it is hovering over something\'92; angyiigaa \'91it is hovering over it\'92 / angyiigughtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  angyiighwaghtuq \'91it keeps on hovering\'92	circle over something												to hover over something; to circle over something						angyi-	angyx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1251 -\
angyilghagh-	f3qbk4f4-	put on a boat rack		angyilghaghaa \'91he put it on a boat rack\'92 /													to put on a boat rack		< angyaq-lghaq				angyilghagh-	angyilghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
angyilghaq	f3qbk4f2	rack for storing a boat		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  angyilghat,
\f2\i  for one rack													
\f0\i0 rack for storing a boat		 < angyaq-lghaq				angyilghaq	angyilghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
angyiqe-	f3qb2s-	trouble a boat (of a whale playing directly under it)		Aghveq 
\f2\i angyiquq
\f0\i0  angyamta asingani. \'91A whale 
\f2\i played
\f0\i0  under our boat.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 29)	play under a boat (of a whale)												to trouble a boat (of a whale playing directly under it); to play under the boat						angyiqe-	angyiqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
angyite-	f3qbns-	many boats (be ~ out in the ocean)			boats (be many ~ out in the ocean)												for there to be many boats out in the ocean		< angyaq-?-				angyite-	angyite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
anighaaghte-	fyb465ns-	act (on) more than before or as much as possible		anighaaghlluni aghnaghaq qiyamalghii \'91the girl is crying much more than before\'92													to act (on) more than before or as much as possible						anighaghte-	anighxghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b anighqun\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fyb52ey\super \'a1	\nosupersub torch		anighqutmeng keneqluta unugtukut kenghiisamta \'91we spent the night getting light from a candle since we lost power\'92; anighqukaghaq kumaghtigu \'91light the small candle\'92; anighqutfak \'91large torch or flare\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  aniighqwaa-, aniighwte-	fire starter	lighter								candle			torch; fire starter; lighter; candle				A&W 12	anighqutfak	anighqun1	anighqun1	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 1\

\f1\b anighqun\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fyb52ey\super \'99	\nosupersub lousewort, wooly			
\f2\i Pedicularis lanata												
\f0\i0 wooly lousewort 
\f2\i (Pedicularis lanata)				
\f0\i0 SLI Cur. Res. Man. 63		anighqun2	anighqun2	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 2\
anighta	fyb5nf	used to be (wishfully or nostalgically)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  anighta tawatetaqsalghiikut \'91it used to be that way for us (but alas it isn't any more)\'92													it used to be (wishfully or nostalgically)		PE ani3ta				anighta	anighta	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
anighte-	fyb5ns-	make up one\'92s mind		alaghrang laalighhnaluni anightuq \'91she made up her mind to visit\'92; anuqa aywaaneng angightuq \'91the wind coninued to blow from the north\'92; kilgaaquskata anightuq ellngallu pinaluni \'91he is determined to run when they run a long distance\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  aanighte-	stay a certain way	determined (be ~)											to make up one\'92s mind; to stay a certain way; to be determined				VK		anighte-	anighte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
anigu	fybue	snow on ground															snow on ground		PE ani!u			> anigullugte-, anigungiite-, anigusiigh-, anigute-, aniguvzeghaq	anigu	anigu	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \
anigullugte-	fybuek]/[ns-	snow is soft and melting (as in spring) 		anigullugtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  anigullugtaa \'91the snow is soft and melting\'92	soft melting snow (as in spring) (there is ~)												for snow to be soft and melting (as in spring)		< anigu-lluk				anigullugte-	anigullugte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
anigulluugte-	fybuek]0[ns-	snow is soft and melting (as in spring) 		anigulluugtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  anigulluugtaa \'91the snow is soft and melting\'92	soft melting snow (as in spring) (there is ~)												for snow to be soft and melting (as in spring)		< anigu-lluk (?)				anigullugte-	anigullxgte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
anigungiite-	fybue37ns-	snow has melted or evaporated and disappear		anigungiituq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  anigungiitaa \'91the snow is gone\'92 /													for snow to haved melted or evaporated and disappeared		< anigu-igh-(u)te-				anigungite-	anigungxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
anigusiigh-	fybuec74-	cut blocks of snow for melting into water															to cut blocks of snow for melting into water		< anigu-siigh-				anigusigh-	anigusxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
anigute-	fybuens-	snowed in (be ~)		anigutuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  anigutaa \'91he is snowed in\'92 / Angyaghput 
\f2\i anigulluni
\f0\i0 , peketulluku nusugaghput. \'91As our boat 
\f2\i was snowed in
\f0\i0 , we had to shovel it to pull it out.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 129)													to be snowed in		< anigu-(u)te-				anigute-	anigute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aniguvzeghaq	fybuedps4f2	first snow on ground in fall															first snow on ground in fall		< anigu-vlaaq				aniguvzeghaq	aniguvzeghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1074 \u1079 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
aniighqwaa-	fy75216-	red-hot (get or be ~)		aniighqwaaguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aniighqwaagaa \'91it is getting red-hot\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  anighqun													to get or be red-hot						anighqwa-	anxghqwx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 -\
aniighwte-	fy751ns-	red-hot (get or be ~)		aniighwngalghii \'91red-hot one\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  anighqun													to get or be red-hot						anighwte-	anxghwte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1265 \u1090 \u1099 -\
animaaghnaq	fybv64yf2	large walrus without tusks		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 large walrus without tusks				CK Rub 77		animaghnaq	animxghnaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1084 \u257 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
aningugh-	fyb3e4-	escape from		eslalluk aningughhneghsiimakangat yuget igleghsughngaaghmeng \'91the men waited out the rain before they moved on\'92; ighninghhaghhaq kaviqragllagluni aningughlluumaaq \'91the infant escaped the chicken pox epidemic\'92	struggle through	wait out											to escape from; to struggle through; to wait out		< ane-?-				aningugh-	aningugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
aningughlluk	fyb3e5k]/r	obstacle															obstacle		< aningugh-lluk				aningughlluk	aningughlluk	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
aningughvik	fyb3e4dbr	exit		mellaasaghiinkut sikum taglamun iwernga aningughvigek kaatagput uwani \'91we almost got caught in the ice while coming home but we found a way out in the area further west\'92	outlet	way out											exit; outlet; a way out		< aningugh-vik				aningughvik	aningughvik	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
aningwaagh-	fyb3164-	boil (get a ~)		aningwaaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aningwaaghaa \'91he got a boil\'92 /													to get a boil		PY ani&uaq				aningwagh-	aningwxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
aningwaaq	fyb3162	boil (on skin)			carbuncle												boil; carbuncle		< ane-i-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq (?); PY ani&uaq				aningwaq	aningwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
anipa	fybgf	owl			snowy owl	
\f2\i Nyctea scandiaca											
\f0\i0 owl; snowy owl 
\f2\i (Nyctea scandiaca)		
\f0\i0 PY-S anipa				anipa	anipa	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \
anipaghllak	fybgf5k]zr	snowy owl			
\f2\i Nyctea scandiaca	
\f0\i0 owl, snowy											snowy owl 
\f2\i (Nyctea scandiaca) 
\f0\i0 (specifically)		< anipa-ghllak				anipaghllak	anipaghllak	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
anleghaq	fyks4f2	walrus moving south in fall															walrus moving south in fall						anleghaq	anleghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
anpaghqe-	fygf52s-	speak or sing loudly (of men)		anpaghquq \'91he raised his voice\'92; atulghiit saghiighqesalghiimeng anpaghqut \'91when the singers really got enthusiastic they sang loud\'92; sangami taana anpaghqa? \'91why is that person so loud?\'92	loudly (speak or sing ~ (of men))	raise one\'92s voice to emphasize what one is saying							check; explaned as: yuget akuzillghit sallghit iglagtughqaaghllaneghmeggni, which VK translates \'91when men carry their voice loud when they talk\'92				to speak or sing loudly (of men); to raise one\'92s voice to emphasize what one is saying				A&W 13		anpaghqe-	anpaghqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
anughaqe-	fye4f2s-	train physically		anughaquq \'91he exercised\'92 / aqelqaghniighyaghqasi anughaquteki \'91train to challenge your visitors (who are coming to compete)\'92; kayaalqiinaluteng anughaqegkaagut \'91they were training and exercising so that they could win\'92	exercise (physically)								check; explained as: peghqigsiq, pinighinaqa, translated by VK as \'91to train and exercise\'92				to train; to exercise		+ PY anu3aq0- (
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik anu3aq0- \'91want to act but feel constrained\'92; Naukan Yupik anu3aq0sa3- \'91encourage, inspire\'92)		A&W 13		anughaqe-	anughaqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
anumi-	fyevb-	favoring		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  anumikaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  anumiyukaa \'91he favors him or feels concern for him\'92; anuminaghtuq \'91he is such that people watch out for him or favor him\'92; anuminaayugtuq \'91he acts in such a way that people will favor him\'92; uninnaqsaghaa anumiyukaa \'91he was going to leave her behind but felt concerned about her\'92	concerned for												favoring; concerned for						anumi-	anumi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 -\

\f1\b anuqa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fye2f\super s	\nosupersub wind		anuqngituq \'91there is no wind\'92													wind		PE anuq0				anuqae	anuqae	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1099 \
anuqataghaaghte-	fye2fnf465ns-	wind picks up		anuqataghaaghtaa \'91the wind is picking up\'92													for wind to pick up		< anuqe-?-				anuqataghaghte-	anuqataghxghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
anuqataghaq	fye2fnf4f2	wind that is picking up		Esgha, enngaatall pinightuten, kinquvek 
\f2\i anuqataghaghmi
\f0\i0  whanga piineqnakevnga. \'91Look you are very fine, when you dry in 
\f2\i the breeze  
\f0\i0 you can paint me.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 27)	breeze												wind that is picking up; breeze		< anuqe-?-				anuqataghaq	anuqataghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
anuqeghrukutaaghllak	fye2s4heren65k]zr	hurricane or similar storm			storm (hurricane or similar ~)												hurricane or similar storm		< anuqa-ruk-?-ghllak				anuqeghrukutaghllak	anuqeghrukutxghllak	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
anuqesuusiq	fye2sc0cb2	weathervane			wind-sock												weathervane; wind-sock		< anuqa-?-(u)siq				anuqesusiq	anuqesxsiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
anuqetat	fye2snfn	waves caused by the wind															waves caused by the wind		< anuqa-?-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 anuqetat	anuqetat	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \
anuqligh-	fye2k]b4-	windy (get or be ~)		anuqlighaa \'91it got windy\'92													to get or be windy		PE anuqli3- (under PE anuq0); < anuqe-ligh-				anuqligh-	anuqligh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
anurga	fyehuf	permanent or eternal ice or snow			ice, permanent or eternal	snow, permanent or eternal											permanent or eternal ice or snow		from Chukchi ?	x			anurga	anurga	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1088 \u1075 \u1072 \
anusi-	fyecb-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > anusigaa-, anusimighte-, anusimighllagh-																			anusi-	anusi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 -\
anusigaa-, anusiyaa-	fyecbu6-. fyecbq6-	tired (be ~ of something that is annoying or painful)		anusigaataa \'91he is tired of it\'92; Mekelghiighhaam gguusiqelleni 
\f2\i anusigaalluku
\f0\i0  gguutniightemun piiq. \'91The little boy 
\f2\i got tired of 
\f0\i0 his toothache and went to the dentist.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 26)													to be tired of something that is annoying or painful		< anusi-?-				anusiga-, anusiya-	anusigx-, anusiyx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u257 -, \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1253 \u257 -\
anusimighte-	fyecbvb5ns-	have "learned one's lesson"		anusimightuq \'91he won't repeat what he did\'92; \'91anusimightaa he made it so that he won't repeat what he did, "taught him a lesson"\'92/ Aghnaghaghhaq qalingunani an\'92gighluni 
\f2\i anusimightuq
\f0\i0  qayughllak aghighllagaa. \'91The little girl 
\f2\i learned her lesson
\f0\i0  from staying out without a raincoat because she got all wet.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 26)	not want to repeat one's actions due to having seen their consequences												to not want to repeat one's actions due to having seen their consequences; to have "learned one's lesson"		PY-S anucimi3- (under PE annut-); < anusi-?-				anusimighte-	anusimighte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
anusimingllagh-	fyecbvb3k]z4-	punish		Taagken nanqigtistem kelengakistemun anusimingllaghtesnayukangaten. \'91And the judge would punish you to the maximum extent.\'92 (Matthew 5:25)													to punish		< anusi-?-ngllagh-				anusimingllagh-	anusimingllagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
anusimingllaghaq	fyecbvb3k]z4f2	inmate of jail															inmate of jail		< anusimingllagh-aq				anusimingllaghaq	anusimingllaghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
anusimingllaghvik	fyecbvb3k]z4dbr	jail			prison												jail; prison		< anusimingllagh-vik				anusimingllaghvik	anusimingllaghvik	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \

\f1\b anyena\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fyqsyf\super s	\nosupersub onion		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 onion		from English \'91onion\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i V&E59		
\f0\i0 anyenae	anyenae	\uc0\u1072 \u1085 \u1253 \u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \u1099 \
apa	fgf	grandfather															grandfather		PE ap(p)a\super 1				\nosupersub apa	apa	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \
apaate-	fg6ns-	estimate size		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  apagh-, apegh-	give directions	directions (give ~)								set the price of something			to estimate size; to give directions; to set the price of something						apate-	apxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
apaavak	fg6dfr	fishhook		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); questioned; cf. 
\f0\i0 anaavak \'91net for catching birds\'92									compare anaavak \'91net for catching birds\'92; check whether used on SLI				fishhook	rh/xjr yf rjkjnrt eljxrb lkz kjdkb cfqrb			Rub. 90		apavak	apxvak	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u257 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
apagh-	fgf4-	beckon		apaghaa \'91he beckoned to her\'92 / apaghiiq \'91he beckoned to someone\'92; Ilanka 
\f2\i apaghanka
\f0\i0  naghaaghesqelluki. \'91I 
\f2\i signaled
\f0\i0  to my friends to come so they can play.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 30)	gesture to come												to beckon; to gesture to come		PY apa3-				apagh-	apagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 -\
apaghyughluq	fgf4m/4k/2	great-grandfather		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 great-grandfather		PY apa3u3luq (under PE ap(p)a\super 1\nosupersub ); for postbase cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik -u3luq; < apa-?-				apaghyughluq	apaghyughluq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u1083 \u1102 \u1179 \
apalla	fgfk]z	vagina											correct translation?				vagina						apalla	apalla	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
apallengya-	fgfk]s3mz-	cry without reason (of children)		apallengyaaq \'91he is fussing\'92/ apallengyaatkaa \'91he is fussing over it\'92; taghnughhaam apallengyaatkumakanga naghaaghun \'91the child is fussing over the toy\'92	fuss without reason (of children)												to cry and fuss without reason (of children)						apallengya-	apallengya-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 -\

\f1\b apalluq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fgfk]/2\super \'a1	\nosupersub chorus of song		Atuun 
\f2\i apallaaneng
\f0\i0  aanqutaat. \'91They started the song from 
\f2\i the verse
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 30)	verse (the first part of an Eskimo song with ~ following a part with just melody)												chorus of song; the first part of an Eskimo song with verse following a part with melody only		PY-S apa@uk				apalluql	apalluql	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 1\

\f1\b apalluq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fgfk]/2\'99	reason behind something		apallaa \'91his reason\'92; Tengegkayuget taginghitut 
\f2\i apalluqluku
\f0\i0  eslalluk. \'91The airplane did not come on 
\f2\i account
\f0\i0  of the rain.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 30)	cause												reason behind something; cause						apalluq2	apalluq2	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 2\
apangiighhaq	fgf375f2	grandfather		
\f2\i endearing term													
\f0\i0 grandfather		< apa-?-ghhaq				apangighhaq	apangxghhaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1187 \u1251 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
apanqigun	fgfy2buey	grandparent, honorary, not related by blood		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 honorary grandparent (not related by blood)		< apa-nqigte-(u)n		CK Rub 91		apanqigun	apanqigun	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
apapa	fgfgf	food (baby word)															food (baby word)						apapa	apapa	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \
apapaagh-	fgfgf4ecb2	give food in honor of a new baby (given by baby\'92s parents going house to house)															to give food in honor of a new baby (given by baby\'92s parents going house to house)		< apapa-?-		VK		apapagh-	apapxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
apapaaghusiq	fgfgf4ecb2	gift of food in honor of new baby given by baby\'92s parents going house to house															gift of food in honor of new baby given by baby\'92s parents going house to house		< apapaagh-(u)siq				apapaghusiq	apapxghusiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
Apapaaq	Fgfg62	Upapak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Upapak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Apapaq	Apapxq	\uc0\u1040 \u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u257 \u1179 \
apaqaqu-	fgf2f2e-	give order(s)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); questioned	
\f0\i0 charge (be in ~ of)	gesticulate							we have apaqu- with this meaning -- the same? check				to give order(s); to be in charge of; to gesticulate	hfcgjhz;fnmcz.vf[fnm herfvb \'f8gjrfpsdfz xnj-k>\uc0\u960 			Rub. 91		apaqaqu-	apaqaqu-	\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
apaqu-	fgf2e-	direct		apaquuq \'91he is directing\'92 / apaqutaa \'91he is directing her\'92; Tuuslaghllalghiit 
\f2\i apaqumeng
\f0\i0  aleghquqayuget. \'91One can use 
\f2\i sign language
\f0\i0  when talking to a deaf person.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 30); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  apagh-, apegh-	instruct	gesture											to direct; to instruct; to gesture						apaqu-	apaqu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
Apavgu	Fgfdue	Apavawook Cape on St. Lawrence Is.															Apavawook Cape on St. Lawrence Is.						Apavgu	Apavgu	\uc0\u1040 \u1087 \u1072 \u1074 \u1075 \u1091 \
apayepayiiq	fgfqsgfq72	spider															spider		from Chukchi apaapa!l0&0n, apaapal!0n, epeepey \'91spider\'92	06, 14			apayepayiq	apayepayxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1253 \u1251 \u1179 \

\f1\b apegh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fgs4-\'a1	tell		apeghtuq \'91he told or confessed what he did\'92; aapghaa \'91he told on her, told about it\'92 / apeghvikaa \'91he confided in her\'92; apelleq \'91something told\'92; Angyaghpaget esghaghluki 
\f2\i aapghanka
\f0\i0  ilamnun, 
\f2\i aapghesqelluki
\f0\i0  ilangitnunllu. \'91After I saw the ship I told about it to the others, askim them to tell about it to the rest of them.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 31)	confess	tell on or about											to tell; to confess; to tell on or about		PY-S ape3-				apegh-1	apegh-1	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub apegh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fgs4-\'99			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > apeghiigh-, apeghyagh-																			apegh-2	apegh-2	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub apeghiigh-	fgs474-	finish		apeghiightuq \'91it got finished\'92; apeghiighaa \'91he finished it\'92 / apeghiiqaq \'91finished work\'92; Neneghmeng 
\f2\i apeghiighyamek
\f0\i0  allighat saaglluki ingaghllutek qavaamalghiik.\'92 \'91Whey they\sub 2\nosupersub  
\f2\i finished
\f0\i0  eating, after spreading the sleeping mat they lay down and slept.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP.  13); Taagken 
\f2\i apeghiighluteng
\f0\i0  neghuutut siivanlleghet, \'85 \'91
\f2\i After
\f0\i0  they did that, the elders ate together, \'85\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:190)	complete	after \'96\'96											to finish; to complete; after \'96\'96	rjyxfnm ltkfnm	< apegh\super 2\nosupersub -?- 		CK V & E 137 (Russ voc)		apeghigh-	apeghxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1271 -\
apeghiighsagh-	fgs475cz4-	get ready		apeghiighsaghtuq \'91he got ready\'92; apeghiighsaghaa \'91he got it ready\'92 / nanevgaq ellnginaghhaq kitumtuq apeghiighsaataqagu neghyaghqameng \'91I wonder who gets food ready for the old man who lives all alone\'92	prepare												to get ready; to prepare		< apeghiigh-sagh-				apeghighsagh-	apeghxghsagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
apeghragh-	fgs4hf4-	betray		apeghraghaa \'91he gave away her secrets\'92; apeghraghta \'91betrayer, informer\'92	give secrets away												to betray; to give secrets away		< apegh\super 1\nosupersub -ragh-				apeghragh-	apeghragh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
apeghseghuq	fgs5cs4e2	talked about thing		apeghseghuuguq \'91he or it made the headlines in the news\'92	headlines (news)												something that has been talked about; headlines (news)		< apegh\super 1\nosupersub -?-				apeghseghuq	apeghseghuq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 \
apeghsughuq	fgs5c/4e2	honorable one		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 famous one	well-known one											honorable one; famous one; well-known one	gjxtnysq. bpdtcnysq. pyfnysq			Rub. 93		apeghsughuq	apeghsughuq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 \
apeghtugh-	fgs5ne4-	teach		apeghtughaa \'91he taught him\'92 / apeghtughiiq \'91he taught, is teaching\'92													to teach		< apegh\super 1\nosupersub -tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				apeghtugh-	apeghtugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
apeghtughista	fgs5ne4bcnf	teacher															teacher		< apeghtugh-i-(s)ta				apeghtughista	apeghtughista	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
apeghtuusaq	fgs5n8cz2	rule			commandment	teaching											rule; commandment; teaching		< apeghtugh-(u)saq				apeghtusaq	apeghtxsaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
apeghyagh-	fgs4mz4-	get something ready			finish something												to get something ready; to finish something		< apegh\super 2\nosupersub -?				apeghyagh-	apeghyagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
apeneq	fgsys2	talkative person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 gossip (person who ~s)												talkative person; gossip (person who gossips)		< apegh\super 1\nosupersub -?		CK Rub 93		apeneq	apeneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
apeng-	fgs3-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > apengqe-, apengte-, apenglleq															PY ap0&0-				apeng-	apeng-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1187 -\
apenghaan	fgsy46y	snow, fresh fluffy		apenghaatmi nanuum tumangi tuumsaghanka \'91I followed the tracks of a polar bear in the fresh snow\'92													fresh fluffy snow		PE ap0- and Yupik postbases (?)		VK and given this way in Rub. too, but SLI Cur. Man. 22 has \'93hard snow\'94 ???		apenghan	apenghxn	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u257 \u1085 \
apenglleq	fgs3k]s2	pressure ridge, small, in sea ice field		
\f2\i see item 7 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	ice pieces or pile on top of pressure ridge	sea ice type											small pressure ridge in sea ice field; ice pieces or pile on top of pressure ridge		< apeng-lleq				apenglleq	apenglleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
apengqe-	fgs32s-	stooped (get ~ over (as from old age))		aghnalqwaaghhaq apengqegkaq \'91the little old woman got stooped over from old age\'92	folded (be ~ over)												to get stooped over (as from old age); to be folded over		< apeng-?-				apengqe-	apengqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1099 -\
apengte-	fgs3ns-	fold		apengtaa \'91he folded it \'91/ aghnaghaam apengsimakek atkuyaaghegni \'91the girl shortened her dress\'92	shorten by folding												to fold; to shorten by folding		< apeng-te\super 1\nosupersub -				apengte-	apengte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 -\
apenqigte-	fgsy2b[ns-	repeat what one has said			say again												to repeat; to say again	gjdnjhznm	< apegh\super 1\nosupersub -nqigte-		Rub. 93		apenqigte-	apenqigte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
apetaq	fgsnf2	tattletale			informer												tattletale; informer		< apegh\super 1\nosupersub -?				apetaq	apetaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
apetuqaq	fgsne2f2	lazy person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 lazy person				CK Rub 93		apetuqaq	apetuqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
apetuyuugte-	fgsne0[ns-	hesitate		apetuyuugtuq \'91he gave an excuse\'92 / kayutnguluku aqfayaghaqa apetuyuugteqrugtuq \'91I sought him out as a helper but he hesitated (gave an excuse)\'92; apetuyuugsaghluni maligutuq \'91after hesitating for a while he went along\'92	give an excuse								check; explained as: sayaghqaaniluni akitukelghii, which VK translates as \'91giving an excuse or hesitat(ing) to do something\'92				to hesitate; to give an excuse		< apegh\super 1\nosupersub -?-		A&W 13		apetuyugte-	apetuyxgte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
apghusiigh-	fg5ec74-	hesitate and/or give an excuse		apghusiightuq \'91he showed no interest\'92/ maninginniluni apghusiightuq \'91saying he has no money he gave an excuse (to not give any)\'92 maligusughngaaghma ullghitagka apghusiighutkagka guunneghllugek \'91even though I wanted to go along I hesitated concerning my snow machine which is hard to start\'92; esla enraq apghusiightuq \'91the weather is not favorable\'92	unfavorable (weather is ~)	unenthusiastic (be ~)							check; explained as apetuyuuglleghhii sayaghqalguniluni nalighmeng sanginniluni, which VK translates as \'91hesitating saying taht he has something to do; hesitating to give something even if he has some\'92	uninterested (be ~)			to hesitate and/or give an excuse; to be unenthusiastic; to be uninterested; to be unfavorable (of weather)		< apegh\super 1\nosupersub -?-		A&W 13		apghusigh-	apghusxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1203 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
apumek	fgevsr	soft snow or dirt			snow, soft	dirt, soft											soft snow or dirt		PE apun (under PE ap0-)				apumek	apumek	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \
apumgute-	fgevuens-	throw into soft snow or dirt		apumgutuq \'91it buried itself in the snow\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he plunged into the snow\'92; apumgutaa \'91he threw it into the soft snow\'92 / Mekelghiighhaq qetgeghluni 
\f2\i apumgutuq
\f0\i0  anigumun, \'85 \'91The little boy jumped and 
\f2\i plunged
\f0\i0  into the snow, \'85\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 31)	plunge into soft snow or dirt	thrust into soft snow or dirt								bury itself in soft snow or dirt			to thrust or throw into soft snow or dirt; to plunge or bury oneself in soft snow or dirt		< apumek-(u)te-				apumgute-	apumgute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
apunaqaqe-	fgeyf2f2s-	request permission to be absent		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); questioned													
\f0\i0 to request permission to be absent				CK Rub 92		apunaqaqe-	apunaqaqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aputiisaq	fgen7cz2	gift		kitum taam aputiisaaneng neqmeng gaaghumalghii \'91she cooked the meat that somebody had given (her)\'92	donation	meat given to someone near the site of butchering or met along the way							what is the base? aputigh-? check				gift; donation; meat given to someone near the site of butchering or met along the way	gjlfhjr	< aputite-(u)saq (?)		Rub. 92; A&W 14		aputisaq	aputxsaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1251 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
aputite-	fgenbns-	give harvested or hunted item to (someone met near site)		tepaghtamineng aputitaanga nallaghluku tepaghniilghii \'91he gave me some seashore-creatures that he had gotten, when I ran into him while he was getting seashore-creatures\'92									in A&W this is only in the example (not a separate entry); check the relationship between aputite- \'91to give\'92, and aputiisaq \'91gift\'92 (what happened to the te?)				to give harvested or hunted item to (someone met near site)				A&W 14, Rub. 92	aputiisaq	aputite-	aputite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aqaleghyak	f2fks4mzr	multicolored thing		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0  Taagken kenlanga meteghlluk tagneghtaa, teghla 
\f2\i aqaleghyagughtaa
\f0\i0 . \'91From then on the raven has been black, and the owl has become 
\f2\i multi-hued.
\f0\i0 \'92 (AANGHHAQ 28)	motley thing												multicolored thing; motley thing; multi-hued thing	gtcnhsq			CK V & E 132; Rub 50		aqaleghyak	aqaleghyak	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
aqapetug-	f2fgsneu-	flap wings while remaining stationary in midair		yuungaaghaq aqapetugluni aagestuq \'91the jaeger flapped its wings and stayed where it was for a long time\'92; aqapetugtuq yuungaaghaq afsengaghmeng esghaalluni \'91the jaeger hovered over a mouse when it saw it\'92	hover (bird)								check; VK\'92s translation of the example doesn\'92t fit with mine (here); word explained as: qawaaget eslami aghuliighwaalghiit yaqiimaghmeng, which VK translates as \'91birds that flap their wings and stay in the same place in midair\'92				to flap wings while remaining stationary in midair; to hover (bird)				A&W 14		aqapetug-	aqapetug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 -\
aqara	f2fhf	frozen layer of ice and snow over ground causing death of reindeer		qavngaq Sivuqaq quyngightupigsalghii aqaram naangeghllakaa \'91long ago St. Lawrence Island used to have lots of reindeer but starvation (due to ice covering the ground) reduced the number greatly\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 aqayghaq									check; explained as: quyngiq neqangiitem tuqughllalghii, which VK translates as \'91reindeer dying of starvation\'92 -- the question is whether the word aqara indicates the frozen layer or the effect it has on the reindeer; \'93Lore..\'94, vol 2, page 87 says \'93this phenomenon is called aqara\'94 and seems to refer to the frozen layer (which fits with cognates elsewhere)				frozen layer of ice and snow over ground causing death of reindeer		PE aqaya!		A&W 14		aqara	aqara	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \
aqavzik	f2fdpbr	cloudberry			salmonberry (lowbush)	
\f2\i Rubus chamaemorus											
\f0\i0 cloudberry; lowbush salmonberry
\f2\i  (Rubus chamaemorus)		
\f0\i0 PE aq0v9i!				aqavzik	aqavzik	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1079 \u1080 \u1082 \
aqayamaawi-	f2fzv61b-	take a long time to heal due to repeated trauma		aagutaatam kililleni aqayamaawisimaa \'91he\'92s having his wound take a long time to heal on account of repeated bumping\'92	heal (take a long time to ~ due to repeated trauma)								check; explained as: kiit sangwaat maamneghlliqelghiit aqnightaatam aagutaatam, which VK translates as \'91a wound that takes a while to heal because of bumping it and hurting it before it heals\'92; check length of a in -maawi-				to take a long time to heal due to repeated trauma		from Chukchi ?	x	A&W 14, VK		aqayamawi-	aqayamxwi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1103 \u1084 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\
aqayghaq	f2fq4f2	algae (slimy green ~ on rocks)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  aqara													slimy green algae on rocks		PE aqaya!		CK Rub 50		aqayghaq	aqayghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
aqeftaghaaq	f2sanf462	bag (skin ~)		Siighnaq 
\f2\i aqeftaghaaq
\f0\i0  neqmeng imiimakanga. \'91She filled the 
\f2\i skin bag,
\f0\i0  (made of) walrus stomach, with food.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 69)													skin bag						aqeftaghaq	aqeftaghxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \
aqeftaghuk	f2sanf4er	dulse (an edible seaweed)			
\f2\i Rhodymenia palmata												
\f0\i0 dulse (an edible seaweed) 
\f2\i (Rhodymenia palmata)						
\f0\i0 aqeftaghuk	aqeftaghuk	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \
Aqeftapagyaq	F2sanfhfumz2	Niyrakpak Lagoon (point on western shore of ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 point on western shore of Niyrakpak Lagoon (Naayvaghpak) on St. Lawrence Is.						Aqeftapagyaq	Aqeftapagyaq	\uc0\u1040 \u1179 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
Aqeftapak	F2sanfgfr	Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices; cf. 
\f0\i0 aqeftaghuk													Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.						Aqeftapak	Aqeftapak	\uc0\u1040 \u1179 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
aqelqaame-	f2sk]6vs-	guest (be a ~ of)			stay with												to be a guest of; to stay with	ujcnbn	< aqelqaq-?-				aqelqame-	aqelqxme-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1084 \u1099 -\
aqelqaghniigh-	f2sk]2f4y74-	challenge guests or be challenged by guests in contests and games															to challenge guests or be challenged by guests in contests and games					< aqelqaq-niigh-	aqelqaghnigh-	aqelqaghnxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
aqelqaghte-	f2sk]2f5ns-	guest (be a ~)															to be a guest		< aqelqaq-?-				aqelqaghte-	aqelqaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aqelqaq	f2sk]2f2	guest															guest		PY-S aq0lqaq				aqelqaq	aqelqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
aqelqiqe-	f2sk]2b2s-	guests (have guests)															to have guests		< aqelqaq-liqe-				aqelqiqe-	aqelqiqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aqelqiqfik	f2sk]2b2abr	guest house			hotel												guest house; hotel		< aqelqiqe-vik				aqelqiqfik	aqelqiqfik	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \
aqelughraq	f2sk/4hf2	walrus swimming in a certain direction		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 walrus swimming in a certain direction		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  CAY aq0@qu3- \'91to go from one point to another\'92 		CK Rub 54		aqelughraq	aqelughraq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
aqemghaq	f2sv4f2	effect that causes the husband of a pregnant woman to be unsucessful at hunting		aqemghalek quyughllak enkaam esgha unguvaastaqughllak \'91because he\'92s a man with a pregnant wife they (the animals he\'92s hunting) continue to live (that is, he doesn\'92t catch them)\'92									check; very confusing whether aqemghaq refers to the effect, the pregnant wife or just what; explanation is: nulighhit aqsalget aqemghalguniiqiit.  enkaam kaapkegkiit, guutkiit tuqunneghlluguftut, which VK translates as \'91in old beliefs it is said for a wife who is expecting a child, any game the husband shoots or strikes is hard to kill\'92				effect that causes the husband of a pregnant woman to be unsucessful at hunting				A&W 14		aqemghaq	aqemghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
aqergiiq	f2shu72	willow ptarmigan		aqergiighet \'91ptarmigans\'92	rock ptarmigan	ptarmigan, willow or rock								
\f2\i Lagopus lagopus 
\f0\i0 or
\f2\i  Lagopus mutus			
\f0\i0 willow ptarmigan (Lagopus lagopus); rock ptarmigan (Lagopus mutus)		PE aq09!i3				aqergiq	aqergxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1075 \u1251 \u1179 \
aqeri-, aqerite-	f2shb-. f2shbns-	nauseated (get ~ from eating too much of one food)		aqeriiq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aqerituq \'91he got nauseous from eating too much of a particular food\'92; neghepagpenasi aqerillequsi \'91don\'92t eat so much or you\'92ll be sick of eating that kind of food\'92	sick (get ~ from eating too much of one food)								check; explanation given is: neghepagluni anusimightekaq, which VK translates as eating too much of one thing which causes to be sick of that particular food\'92				to get nauseated from eating too much of one food		cf. PY aqitu3- \'91be full of food\'92 (under PE aqit- \'91be soft\'92)		A&W 14		aqeri-, aqerite-	aqeri-, aqerite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1080 -, \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aqesgiigh-	f2sc[74-	sneeze (verb)		aqesgiightuq \'91he sneezed\'92 /													to sneeze		PY-S aq0st0-				aqesgigh-	aqesgxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1093 \u1251 \u1271 -\
aqevgaghnak	f2sduf4yfr	thick-billed murre			murre, thick-billed	
\f2\i Uria lomvia											
\f0\i0 thick-billed murre (Uria lomvia)						aqevgaghnak	aqevgaghnak	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
aqevghaq	f2sd4f2	emblem sew onto parka in recognition of expertise at something											??				emblem sew onto parka in recognition of expertise at something				VK		aqevghaq	aqevghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1074 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
aqevleghaq	f2sdks4f2	dangling decoration, small, on a parka		aghnalqwaaghaam aghsughtaa aqevleghaghllak \'91the little old woman's gutskin parka has lots of dangling decorations\'92	decoration (small, dangling ~ on a parka)												small, dangling decoration on a parka		PY aq0vl03				aqevleghaq	aqevleghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b aqfa-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f2af-\'a1	fetch		aqfaa \'91he fetched it\'92 / aqfaqughaa \'91he fetched it quickly\'92	go get	get (go ~)											to fetch; to go get		PE aqva-				aqfa-1	aqfa-1	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1092 \u1072 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub aqfa-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f2af-\'99			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > aqfaqugh-, aqfaate-, aqfayngwaag-															PE aqva-				aqfa-2	aqfa-2	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1092 \u1072 -\super 2\
\nosupersub aqfaagh-	f2a64-	invite		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 call on 	challenge											to invite; to call on; to challenge	pjdtn. ghbukfifnm. dspsdfnm	< aqfa\super 1\nosupersub -?-		CK V & E 144		aqfagh-	aqfxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1092 \u257 \u1271 -\
aqfaasnaq	f2a6c]f2	running		
\f2\i adverbial particle;
\f0\i0  aqfaasnaq igaghvigmun taglaghtunga \'91I went running up to the schoolhouse\'92; Tawani nagataghlluni aga 
\f2\i aqfaasnaq
\f0\i0  ukigyalghiimi, ukigyalghiimi aga iteghtuq, iteghtuq. \'91After she had listened for a short time, she went 
\f2\i running
\f0\i0  down, and when she ran down, she went in; yes, she went in.\'92 (KALLAGNEGHET 10); 
\f2\i Aqfaasnaq
\f0\i0  igaghvigmun taglaghtungaa. \'91I went 
\f2\i running
\f0\i0  up to the schoolhouse.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 32)													running		< aqfaate-?				aqfasnaq	aqfxsnaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1092 \u257 \u1089 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \
aqfaate-	f2a6ns-	run		aqfaatuq \'91he is running\'92 / aqfaatutaa \'91he ran with it\'92													to run		< aqva\super 2\nosupersub -?-(u)te-				aqfate-	aqfxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1092 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aqfaayngwaag-	f2a6q316u-	trot		Nanuq 
\f2\i aqfaayngwaagmeng
\f0\i0  qimagtuq. \'91The polar bear got away 
\f2\i trotting along
\f0\i0 .\'92 													to trot		< aqfaate-?-				aqfayngwag-	aqfxyngwxg-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1092 \u257 \u1253 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 -\
aqfaqugh-	f2af2e4-	jog			run for exercise												to jog; to run for exercise		< aqva\super 2\nosupersub -qugh- (?)				aqfaqugh-	aqfaqugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1092 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
aqfasuk	f2afc/r	red-breasted merganser			pintail duck	
\f2\i Mergus serrator								Anas acuta			
\f0\i0 red-breasted merganser 
\f2\i (Mergus serrator)(SLI meaning)
\f0\i0 ; pintail duck 
\f2\i (Anas acuta)(Chukotka meaning)		
\f0\i0 < aqfa\super 2\nosupersub -? (?)				aqfasuk	aqfasuk	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1092 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
aqfate-	f2afns-	fetch something		aqfatuq \'91he fetched something\'92; aqfataa \'91he fetched something for him\'92 / Unaaq 
\f2\i aqfatunga
\f0\i0  qawaagmeng elpesineng. \'91This morning I 
\f2\i went and got
\f0\i0  some birds from your house.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 32)	get (go ~ get something)	go get something											to fetch something; to go get something		< aqfa\super 1\nosupersub -(u)te-				aqfate-	aqfate-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1092 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Aqfayegaak	F2afqsu6r	Akfayegak Creek on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Akfayegak Creek on St. Lawrence Is.		< aqfa\super ?\nosupersub -				Aqfayegak	Aqfayegxk	\uc0\u1040 \u1179 \u1092 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1075 \u257 \u1082 \
aqfayngwaag-	f2afq316u-	trot			gallop or run fast (of reindeer, bear, etc.)								check this; mightn\'92t it be aqfaayngwaagh-				to trot; to gallop or run fast (of reindeer, bear, etc.)		< aqfa\super 2\nosupersub -?				aqfayngwag-	aqfayngwxg-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1092 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 -\
aqighta, aqightuta	f2b5nf. f2b5nenf	meteor		
\f2\i questioned													
\f0\i0 meteor				from Darlene Orr		aqighta, aqightuta	aqighta, aqightuta	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 , \u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
aqii-	f27-	trip (take a pleasure ~ or early spring boat ~)		aqiiguq \'91he went on a pleasure trip \'91/	vacation (go on a ~)	south toward Anadyr (go ~)											to take a pleasure trip; to go on a vacation; to take an early spring boat trip; to go south toward Anadyr 
\f2\i (Chukotkan meaning)		
\f0\i0 PE aqu(C)i-				aqi-	aqx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1251 -\
aqiilwagh-	f27k1f4-	overnight along the way while traveling		igleghat tumangani aqiilwaghaqluteng nunaaghmeggnun aglaghtut \'91those who travel to their camp overnight along the way\'92													to overnight along the way while traveling		< aqii-		VK		aqilwagh-	aqxlwagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1083 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aqiiyag-	f27zu-	arrive as a visitor from afar															to arrive as a visitor from afar		< aqii-?-		VK		aqiyag-	aqxyag-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1103 \u1075 -\
aqiiyak	f27zr	visitor from afar		Sivungameng aqiiyaget kaatut \'91the visitors from Savoonga arrived\'92									check; how exactly is this different from aqelqaq?; explained as: naken aqelqaq kaallghii, which VK translates as \'91people arriving from someplace\'92				visitor from afar		< aqii-?		A&W 14		aqiyak	aqxyak	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1103 \u1082 \
aqimlae	f2bvkzs	bottle (especially of liquor)			liquor												liquor; bottle (especially of liquor)		from Chukchi \'91eqim0l, pl. \'91eqiml0t \'91liquor, vodka\'92	14		aqimleghutaq	aqimlae	aqimlae	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
aqimle-	f2bvks-	drink liquor		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to drink liquor				CK Rub 50		aqimle-	aqimle-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 -\
aqimleghutaq	f2bvks4enf2	bottle		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 aqimleghutak, 
\f2\i for one bottle;
\f0\i0  Melnguut qafsinat 
\f2\i aqimleghutagnun
\f0\i0  kanaghtanka igaghvigmi liisaghqaaluki. \'91I put several beetles in a 
\f2\i bottle
\f0\i0  to study them in school.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 99)													bottle		< aqimla-lghutaq				aqimleghutaq	aqimleghutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aqina-	f2byf-	envious (be ~)		aqinaaq \'91he is envious\'92 /													to be envious						aqina-	aqina-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 -\
aqinake-	f2byfrs-	envious (be ~ ) over (it)		aqinakaa \'91he is envious over it\'92 /													to be envious over (it)		< aqina-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				aqinake-	aqinake-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
aqlaaghmig-	f2k]94fvbu-	draft (stir up a ~)		aqlaaghmigaa \'91it caused a draft on it\'92; aqfaasnaq naghughlleghhii aqlaaghmigutuq \'91the one running fast by caused a draft\'92; aqlaaghmillghem nanim kengha pamastaa \'91the draft made the lamp\'92s flame flicker\'92; naghughlleghiim aqlaaghmillgha tepengllaasighpagnituq \'91the air set into motion by, or emanating from, the passerby smells of perfume\'92; qawaak yaqiiluni aqlaaghmigaa \'91the bird flapped its wings and set the air in motion\'92	air (set ~ in motion)	emanate vapors							check; explained as: saam qaprallghan suupellgha, supuga, which VK glosses as \'91draft of something\'92; check the third example and its gloss				to stir up a draft; to set air in motion; to emanate vapors		PE aqla-		A&W 14		aqlaghmig-	aqlxghmig-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
aqlagh-	f2k]z4-	dry up after a rain (of ground)															to dry up after a rain (of ground)		PE aqla-			> aqlagha, aqlaghaghraag-, aqlaghaghte-, aqlaghate-	aqlagh-	aqlagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
aqlagha	f2k]z4f	cold air			coldness in the air												cold air; coldness in the air		PE aqla-; < aqlagh-?- (?)				aqlagha	aqlagha	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \
aqlaghaghraag-	f2k]z4f4h6u-	cold (be somewhat ~)															to be somewhat cold		< aqlaghagh-ghraag-				aqlaghaghrag-	aqlaghaghrxg-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1075 -\
aqlaghaghte-	f2k]z4f5ns-	cold (weather gets ~)		aqlaghaghtuq \'91it got cold\'92	weather gets cold												for weather to get cold		< aqlagh-?-				aqlaghaghte-	aqlaghaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aqlaghate-	f2k]z4fns-	cold (weather is ~)		aqlaghatuq \'91it is cold\'92													for it to be cold (weather)		< aqlagh-?-te\super 3\nosupersub -				aqlaghate-	aqlaghate-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aqnigh-	f2y]b4-	pain (be in ~)		= angqigh-													to be in pain		PE at&i3-			aqnighnagh-, aqnighneq, aqnighqe-, aqnighte-, aqniilngagh-, aqniqe-, aqnistalghii	aqnigh-	aqnigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
aqnighmillaghqe	f2y]b4vbk]z52s-	hurt (suddenly start to ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to suddenly start to hurting		< aqnigh-?-		CK Rub 51		aqnighmillaghqe	aqnighmillaghqe	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aqnighnagh- 	f2y]b4yf4-	painful (be ~)															to be painful		< aqnigh-nagh-				aqnighnagh- 	aqnighnagh- 	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aqnighneq	f2y]b4ys2	illness															illness		< aqnigh-neq\super 2				\nosupersub aqnighneq	aqnighneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aqnighqe-	f2y]b52s-	pain (have or cause ~)		aqnighquq \'91he is in pain\'92; aqnighqaa \'91he hurt her \'91/	hurt												to have or cause pain; to hurt		< aqnigh-?-				aqnighqe-	aqnighqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aqnighte-	f2y]b5ns-	hurt		aqnightuq \'91he got hurt\'92; aqnightaa \'91he hurt her \'91/	hurt (get ~)												to hurt; to get hurt		< aqnigh-?-				aqnighte-	aqnighte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aqniilngagh-	f2y]7k3f4-	endure pain		aqniilngaghtuq \'91he endured pain\'92; aqniilngaghaa \'91he caused her to suffer pain (as by hitting her or throwing something at her)\'92 /	pain (endure or cause ~)	cause pain											to endure pain; to cause pain		< aqnigh-?-				aqnilngagh-	aqnxlngagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aqniima-	f2]y7vf-	compassionate (be a ~ person)		aqniimaaq \'91she is a compassionate person\'92 / aqniimalghiim aghnam yaywaali aatkangllaqaa nangllegyagutem \'91the compassionate woman made clothes for the orphan out of pity\'92									check; sounds okay however				to to be a compassionate person		< aqnigh-(i/u)ma-		A&W 15		aqnima-	aqnxma-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1100 \u1085 \u1251 \u1084 \u1072 -\
aqniqe-	f2y]b2s-	emotional attachment (feel ~ to someone or something)		aqniqaqa ilughaghma paniga \'91I have tender feelings for my cousin\'92s daughter\'92; atkuyaaghegka aqniqagka tuuneghmeng \'91I would hate to part with my dress by giving away\'92	fondness (feel ~ toward (him))	tenderness (feel ~ toward (him))											to feel emotional attachment to someone or something; to feel fondness or tenderness toward (him)		< aqnigh-liqe-		VK		aqniqe-	aqniqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aqnistalghii	f2y]bcnfk47	one who is easily hurt			easily hurt person												one who is easily hurt		< aqnigh-?-lghii				aqnistalghi	aqnistalghx	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \

\f1\b aqsa\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f2cz\super \'a1	\nosupersub belly		aqsat \'91bellies\'92													belly		PE aq(0)ya3			aqsaghmikun, aqsalek, aqsamuk, aqsanguma-, aqsaquq, aqsiqe-	aqsa1	aqsa1	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 1\

\f1\b aqsa\super 2\nosupersub ; aqsak	
\f0\b0 f2cz\super \'99\nosupersub . f2czr	back of animal		quyngim aqsakek \'91the reindeer\'92s back\'92													back of animal				Rub 52; also in jr. dict. p. 33 (at aqsi); VK		aqsa2; aqsak	aqsa2; aqsak	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 2, \u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
aqsaghmikun	f2cz4vbrey	back to back		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 back to back		< aqsa\super 2\nosupersub -
\f2\i vialis 				
\f0\i0 aqsaghmikun	aqsaghmikun	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
aqsaghwaaq	f2cf4162	back part of man\'92s parka		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 the back part of man\'92s parka		< aqsa\super 2\nosupersub -(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK Rub 52		aqsaghwaq	aqsaghwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
aqsagmig-	f2czuvb2s-	put something on one\'92s back for carrying there															to put something on one\'92s back for carrying there		< aqsak-mig-		VK		aqsagmig-	aqsagmig-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aqsalek	f2czksr	pregnant woman															pregnant woman		< aqsa\super 1\nosupersub -lek				aqsalek	aqsalek	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
aqsalgu-	f2czkue-	pregnant (be ~)		aqsalguuq \'91she is pregnant\'92 /													to be pregnant		< aqsalek-(ng)u-				aqsalgu-	aqsalgu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 -\
aqsallineq	f2czk]bys2	upper abdomen below sternum															upper abdomen below sternum				SLI Cur. Man. 76		aqsallineq	aqsallineq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
aqsalliqe-	f2czk]b2s-	stomachache (have a ~)		aqsalliquq \'91he has a stomachache\'92													to have a stomachache		 < aqsa\super 1\nosupersub -lluk-liqe-				aqsalliqe-	aqsalliqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aqsamuk	f2czver	salmon belly			belly of salmon	belly											belly; salmon belly		PE aqyamu! (under PE aq(0)ya3); < aqsa\super 1\nosupersub -?-				aqsamuk	aqsamuk	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1091 \u1082 \
aqsanguma-	f2cz3evf-	pregnant (be ~)															to be pregnant		< aqsa\super 1\nosupersub -nge-(i/u)ma-				aqsanguma-	aqsanguma-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 -\
aqsaqughiitaq	f2cz2e47nf2	snack to keep the stomach from growling											check; but sounds okay				snack to keep the stomach from growling		< aqsaquq-(ng)iitaq		A&W 15, VK	aqsaqughiitigh-	aqsaqughitaq	aqsaqughxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aqsaqughiitigh-	f2cz2e47nb4-	snack to keep the stomach from growling		aqsaqughiitightuq \'91he had a snack\'92 / aqsaqughiitiqaghluni navek pillequnga \'91after I have a little snack I\'92ll go somewhere\'92; aqsaqughiitiilta sivukluta \'91let\'92s snack first\'92									check; but sounds okay				to snack to keep the stomach from growling		< aqsaqughiitaq-ligh-		A&W 15		aqsaqughitigh-	aqsaqughxtigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\
aqsaquq	f2cz2e2	stomach organ		Ayvemta 
\f2\i aqsaqghwa
\f0\i0  imanameng imaqeftuq. \'91The 
\f2\i stomach
\f0\i0  of our walrus (the walrus we caught) was full of clams.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 33)													stomach organ		< aqsa\super 1\nosupersub -quq				aqsaquq	aqsaquq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
aqsi-	f2cb-	wash one\'92s back		aqsiiq \'91he washed his own back\'92; aqsii \'91he washed his (another\'92s) back\'92 /  aqsiiquq \'91he is washing his back; he regularly washes his back\'92													to wash one's back		< aqsa\super 2\nosupersub -li-				aqsi-	aqsi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1080 -\
aqsiqe-	f2cb2s-	stomachache (have a ~)		aqsiquq \'91he has a stomachache\'92													to have a stomachache		< aqsa\super 1\nosupersub -liqe-				aqsiqe-	aqsiqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
Aqulakaq	F2ekzrf2	Akoolokok Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Akoolokok Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Aqulakaq	Aqulakaq	\uc0\u1040 \u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
aqume-	f2evs-	sit down		aqumuq \'91he sat down\'92 /													to sit down		PE aqum0-				aqume-	aqume-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 -\
aqumga-	f2evuf-	sitting (be ~)		aqumgaaq \'91he is sitting\'92 /													to be sitting		PY aqum!a- (under PE aqum0-); < aqume-nga-				aqumga-	aqumga-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1075 \u1072 -\
Aqumuq	F2eve2	November		
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0  \'91it sat\'92
\f2\i , referring to the sun starting to \'93sit\'94 low in the sky, never rising many degrees over the horizon, during the winter months; also listed in various sources as 
\f0\i0 October, November-December; December, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  January													November		< aqume-
\f2\i indicative				
\f0\i0 Aqumuq	Aqumuq	\uc0\u1040 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1091 \u1179 \
aqumutaq	f2evenf2	chair		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 aqumutak, 
\f2\i for one chair	
\f0\i0 seat												chair; seat		< aqume-(u)taq				aqumutaq	aqumutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aqupiitaq	f2eg7nf2	sled load-cover/mat to sit on (usually made of polar bear skin)		neghighluku aqupiitat atuqepigtiit qimugsimun \'91years ago they regularly used polar bear pelt load-cover/mats when dog sledding\'92; aqupiitighlukek qamiyek aqumuq \'91he put a load-cover/mat on the sled and sat down\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 aqume-									check, but seems okay; explained as: qimugsimi sami aqumutat nanuum amiirii asighutkayuget usim qaayngakun nalighmeng qamiyem qaayngakun, which VK translates as \'91a piece of polar bear skin that is layed and secured on top of things or right on the sled to sit on\'92				sled load-cover/mat to sit on (usually made of polar bear skin)				A&W 15		aqupitaq	aqupxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aqupilegh-	f2egbks4-			
\f2\i root: >
\f0\i0  aqupileghnagh-, aqupileghragh-, aqupilghsagh-, aqupileghyug-																			aqupilegh-	aqupilegh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
aqupileghnagh-	f2egbks4yf4-	obligated (make one feel ~)		Nateghmi utaqiilghaaten. Legan kanaaghlluku 
\f2\i aqupileghnaghqeghngaata
\f0\i0  wata, qineghsaqunang. \'91Stay in the outer room. Just hand it in to them; no matter how much they 
\f2\i coax or hint
\f0\i0 , don\'92t even look in.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:198)	hints (be the recipient of ~ that someone needs or wants something)												to make one feel obligated; to be the recipient of hints that someone needs or wants something		< aqupilegh-nagh-				aqupileghnaghqe-	aqupileghnaghqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aqupileghragh-	f2egbks4hf4-	hint to be given something		aqupileghralghii kayusiitaghhnaqaqa \'91I am going to help her because she has been hinting (that she needs help)\'92	ask hesitantly												to ask hesitantly; to hint to be given something		< aqupilegh-ragh-				aqupileghragh-	aqupileghragh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aqupileghsagh-	f2egbks5cf4-	hint to be given something		Atamnun tuunagka 
\f2\i aqupileghsaghaatkegkek
\f0\i0  ulimaaghminun atuqnalukek, usputaasiqumaagkenka iyaqraasiqumaagkenka. \'91I gave it to my father since he kept 
\f2\i hinting
\f0\i0  that he could use it for carving, measuring things, and decorating (his carvings).\'92 (KALLAG. 49)													to hint to be given something		< aqupilegh-sagh-				aqupileghsagh-	aqupileghsagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aqupileghyug-	f2egbks4m/u-	obligated (feel ~ to help)															to feel obligated to help		< aqupilegh-yug-				aqupileghyug-	aqupileghyug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
aqupilqe-	f2egbk]2s-	come to someone\'92s aid		ullghitakek yugem anigumi apumgullutek nusuneghmeng aghughlukek, eltughani kayagtaqaa estugaghmun, \'93mekelghiighet naliitanguq aqupilqennaqlitnga\'94 \'91a man got his vehicle stuck in the snow and couldn\'92t pull it out so he sent his grandson to the store to ask, \'93are there any boys who can come help me\'94	help												to come to someone\'92s aid; to help				Akiingqwaghneghet 110		aqupilqe-	aqupilqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aqutaghwaaq	f2enf4162	game for young boys, played with two sticks		
\f2\i one stick, on the ground, has a small peg near the end while the other is held in the hand and has a string tied to the end; the other end of the string is wrapped around the peg on the stick on the ground; jerking the hand-held stick makes the other stick jump into the air and then slowly gyrate to the ground; formerly this game was played in celebration of catching a whale													
\f0\i0 game for young boys, played with two sticks						aqutaghwaq	aqutaghwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
aquutagh-	f28nf4-	steer (boat, sled, etc.)															to steer		PE aqut- (under PE aqu)				aqutagh-	aqxtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aquutaq	f28nf2	rudder															rudder		PE aqut- (under PE aqu)				aqutaq	aqxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
aragh-	fhf4-	shout		araghtuq \'91he shouted\'92; araghaa \'91he shouted at her\'92 / aratuqaq \'91one who screams a lot\'92	yell	scream								holler			to shout; to yell; to scream; to holler		PE a9(9)a(a)				aragh-	aragh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
araghaatagh-	fhf46nf4-	scream		araghaataghtuq \'91he screamed\'92													to scream		< aragh-?-		VK		araghatagh-	araghxtagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
aragyulga	fhfum/kuf	kettle, small, for making hot beverage		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 small kettle for making hot beverage		maybe from Chukchi er\'920, er0n \'91boiled meat or fish\'92 and suffix -yol!a \'91thing or place for\'92		CK Rub 93		aragyulga	aragyulga	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1083 \u1075 \u1072 \
arasqa	fhfc2f	old walrus skin on a winter tent		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 old walrus skin on a winter tent				CK Rub 94		arasqa	arasqa	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \
arekull	fhsrek]	but it had already happened		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  utaqaanka kaatelleghqii arekull kaasimalghiit \'91I was waiting for them to arrive but they had already arrived\'92; 
\f2\i Arekull
\f0\i0  Balena-m nalighneghaneng makreghqullghuftut. \'91They had 
\f2\i already
\f0\i0  peeled off from some part of the (ship) Balena.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)	already												but it had already happened; already		from Chukchi arekul \'91turn out to be\'92				arekull	arekull	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1099 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \
arekulnguq	fhsrek3e2	but it had already happened		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 but it had already happened		< arekull-nguq				arekulnguq	arekulnguq	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1099 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
aremaataq	fhsv6nf2	hook at end of 
\f2\i kukilnget
\f0\i0 , the chain used for holding pot over seal-oil lamp															hook at end of 
\f2\i kukilnget
\f0\i0 , the chain used for holding pot over seal-oil lamp		from Chukchi er\'920, er0n \'91boiled meat or fish\'92, an intervening postbase, and Yupik postbase -(u)taq \'91device for\'92				aremataq	aremxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1099 \u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
argughagh-	fhue4f4-	return while boating after the boat has drifted with the current		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to return while boating after the boat has drifted with the current		PE a9!u3-		CK Rub 94		argughagh-	argughagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
argughaq	fhue4f2	walrus going west or south		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 walrus going west or south		PE a9!u3-		gloss 2 V Tepegkaq		argughaq	argughaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
arguta	fhuenf	leash to hold whip to sled		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 argutet,
\f2\i  for one rope	
\f0\i0 tether to hold whip to sled												leash or tether to hold whip to sled				CK Rub 94		arguta	arguta	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
ari 	fhb	otter (land or river ~)		
\f2\i neither the land nor sea otter is found in the St. Lawrence Is. area	Lutra canadensis	
\f0\i0 otter (sea ~) 								
\f2\i Enhydra lutris			
\f0\i0 land or river otter (
\f2\i Lutra canadensis); 
\f0\i0 sea otter 
\f2\i (Enhydra lutris) 		
\f0\i0 from English \'91otter\'92	SLI			ari 	ari 	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1080 \
arkamaaka	firfv6rf	pole, corner, of the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 corner pole of the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		from Chukchi ?	x	Rub 118		arkamaka	arkamxka	\uc0\u1072 \u1096 \u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u257 \u1082 \u1072 \
Armaramket	Fhvfhfvrsn	clan (a particular ~)		
\f2\i originally from Chukotka; 
\f0\i0 = Aymaramket; 
\f2\i singular is 
\f0\i0 Armaramka													a particular clan		from Chukchi arma!t0 \'91strong\'92 and remk0n \'91people\'92				Armaramket	Armaramket	\uc0\u1040 \u1088 \u1084 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \
armi	fhvb	army															army		from English \'91army\'92	SLI			armi	armi	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1084 \u1080 \
arughsit	fhe5cbn	houses seen from a distance offshore		
\f2\i plural; Arughsit
\f0\i0  pama aliightut. \'91
\f2\i The houses
\f0\i0  are now visible up there.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 33); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  aruugh-													houses seen from a distance offshore						arughsit	arughsit	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1091 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \
Arutu	Fhene	Cape Cherkasskogo at the mouth of Tkachen Bay Chukotka (site near ~)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site near Cape Cherkasskogo (near the mouth of Tkachen Bay Chukotka)				CK		Arutu	Arutu	\uc0\u1040 \u1088 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \
aruugh-	fh84-	watch for sea mammals on the ice		aruughtuq \'91he watched or is watching\'92; aruughaa \'91he watched or is watching for it or him\'92 / aruughvik \'91observation place on higher ground\'92	call out for someone whose arrival is anticipated	observe from a height											to watch for sea mammals on the ice; to call out for someone whose arrival is anticipated; to observe from a height						arugh-	arxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1088 \u1263 \u1271 -\
asaghlak, asaghrak	fcz4kzr. fcz4hfr	gills		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 used in SLI?; (Rub 116 has aghsaghlak)				gills						asaghlak, asaghrak	asaghlak, asaghrak	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 , \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
asak	fczr	paternal aunt		asaga \'91his aunt\'92	aunt, paternal												paternal aunt; one's father's sister		PE acca!				asak	asak	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
asalughaq	fczk/4f2	anvil or thing used as an anvil		uyghak asalughaqluku uyghiin agughpagtekaq saagtaa \'91I used a large rock as an anvil for (straightening) the bent part of the (dogteam) anchor\'92									check but looks okay -- also in Rub.; explained as: repaqumun asiliqutaq, which VK translates as \'91anvil or something else to put down something usually iron to pound on it\'92; see if there is asaluq too in CSY				anvil or thing used as an anvil	yfrjdfkmyz	cf. PE acalu3 \'91kayak tray for line\'92		A&W 15; Rub. 97	asalughigh-	asalughaq	asalughaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
asalughigh-	fczl/4b4-	anvil (use something as an ~)		uyghagmeng asalughighlunga tuquqaq kaagtughaqa \'91I used a rock as an anvil and pounded on a nail\'92													to use something as an anvil		< asalughaq-ligh-				asalughigh-	asalughigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1076 \u1102 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
asangsi	fcz3cb	furthermore		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 asangsi qeghaatkat nefkuurat neqnipigniiqiit \'91they say that the dried meat hung on the racks is even more delicious\'92; 
\f2\i Asangsi
\f0\i0  ugika tagikuni qevuulluni quyallequq. \'91
\f2\i Furthermore
\f0\i0 , when my husband arrives he\'92ll be very, very thankful.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 36)	even more so								check, explained as wataqaaq, changed by VK to elngaatakqun, which she glosses as \'91furthermore\'92				furthermore; even more so		from Chukchi ? 	x	A&W 15		asangsi	asangsi	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1089 \u1080 \
asanut	fczyen	as long as		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  unugsighngaaghmeng asanut pinitun piqaghtaqegkuyeng \'91as long as they behave it is alright for them stay out late\'92; asanut pinighluki nagaqumteki itagnaghillequkut \'91at least if we hear that they are okay we\'92ll be fine\'92; 
\f2\i Asanut
\f0\i0  elpek espamavek tunuqlighhamnnun aglaghpenang piiqi! \'91
\f2\i At least
\f0\i0 , you must never to to that one back there.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 134)	at least								check; we also have asunan; are they all the same?; explained as: waran tawaten, which VK translates as \'91at least or as long as... in cases as...\'92				as long as; at least		from Chukchi ecenut, ecenur \'91if only, better\'92		A&W 15		asanut	asanut	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \
aseghena	fcs4syf	water (very slightly salty ~)		naayvam esneghalgem megha aseghena \'91the water of the lake with a lagoon opening out to the sea is very slightly salty\'92; aseghenaghughngaan qayungllaalta \'91let\'92s make tea even though it (the water) is brackish\'92	brackish water								check, but sounds okay but where does it come from (no obvious base, no cognates, maybe Chukchi??); explained as: meq taghyughnitevleghaq, which VK translates as \'91fresh water that has a taint of salt\'92				very slightly salty water; brackish water		from Chukchi ?	x	A&W 15		aseghena	aseghena	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \
asemeghqe-	fcsvs52s-	accident or other calamity (be involved in an ~)		nani asemeghqumaat, aviitut \'91somewhere they may have been involved in an accident, they are gone\'92									check, explained as: naten saluteng tazimantekat, which VK translates as \'91not returning from outing because of an accident or some kind of disasterous happening\'92				to be involved in an accident or other calamity						asemeghqe-	asemeghqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
asenge-	fcs3s-	owe money or the like to (him)		asengaa \'91he is in debt to her \'91/	debt (be in ~ to (him))												to owe (him); to be in debt to (him)		from Chukchi ac0&, pl. ac0&0t \'91debt\'92	14			asenge-	asenge-	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 -\

\f1\b asi\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fcb\super \'a1	\nosupersub area under		asingani \'91under it, lower part of it\'92; asingighaa \'91he put something under it\'92; naaygham asilighneghani \'91on the lower part of the mountain\'92; asingaaneng \'91from the bottom of it\'92; asiinganeng \'91from the very bottom\'92 	under area	lower part											area under; lower part		PY-S aci\super 1			\nosupersub asiliqutaq, asingaanun, asingiitaq, asingilnguq, asiiq, asitmun, asivagh-, asivaq	asi1	asi1	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub asi\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fcb\super \'99	\nosupersub area in the winter tent where the head of the bed is located		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 area in the winter tent where the head of the bed is located				CK Rub 94		asi2	asi2	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \super 2\

\f1\b \nosupersub asi\super 3	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fcb\super \'a3	\nosupersub back part of a quadruped animal		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 back part of a quadruped animal				CK Rub 94		asi3	asi3	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \super 3\

\f1\b \nosupersub asi\super 4	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fcb\super \'a2	\nosupersub tip of harpoon that is tied to a rope		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 tip of harpoon that is tied to a rope				CK Rub 94		asi4	asi4	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \super 4\
\nosupersub asigh-	fcb4-	tied in a bundle		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0 asightaa \'91he tied it\'92; asighngaaq \'91it is tied up\'92 / angyam temangi nekeftaqiit tapghagmeng, tapghaaghaghmeng, suqaghmeng uskughangllaqamengllu qepuughaalluqii asighulluki \'91boat frames are erected by lashing parts together and securing them with ropes, cords and strips of baleen\'92													tied in a bundle					asighqe-, asighutaq	asigh-	asigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
asighneq	fcb4ys2	bundle, standard size, of something		Enkaam qafsina 
\f2\i asighneq
\f0\i0 , qulaneng uglaghaqluku asightaqluku sangwaa. \'91And how many [in] a 
\f2\i bundle?
\f0\i0  -- they would bundle them, more than ten together.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:92)													standard size bundle of something		< asighte-neq				asighneq	asighneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
asighqe-	fcb52s-	tie up		asighqaa \'91he tied it, or him, up\'92													to tie up		< asigh-ghqe\super 3\nosupersub -				asighqe-	asighqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
asighutaq	fcb4enf2	strap			rope or cord for tying things in a bundle	cord or rope by which rocks are hung anchoring walrus skin roofing on the traditional dome-shaped house											strap; rope or cord for tying things in a bundle; cord or rope by which rocks are hung anchoring walrus skin roofing on the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< asigh-(u)taq				asighutaq	asighutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
asiighwaaq	fc74162	colored trim at hem  of parka		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 colored trim hem of parka		
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 < asiiq-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK Rub 95		asighwaq	asxghwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
asiilpak	fc7k]gfr	rear half of a whale		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rear half of a whale		< asi\super \'a3\nosupersub -?		CK Rub 96 CK 		asilpak	asxlpak	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
asiiq	fc72	fancy border at hem of parka			trunk, part below waist												fancy border at hem of parka; part of trunk below waist		< asi\super 1\nosupersub -?-		CK Rub 95 on gloss 2, 3		asiq	asxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
asiliqutaq	fcbkb2enf2	base			pad put underneath to raise something, protecta surface, etc.												pad put under a thing to raise it, to protect the surface underneath, catch a leak, etc.; base		< asi\super 1\nosupersub -ligh-kutaq				asiliqutaq	asiliqutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
asingiitaq	fcb37nf2	roller used to move a boat on the beach															roller used to move a boat on the beach		< asi\super 1\nosupersub -igh-(u)taq				asingitaq	asingxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
asingilnguq	fcb3bk3e2	bottomless thing			lake, very deep												bottomless thing; very deep lake		< asi\super 1\nosupersub -(ng)ite-nguq				asingilnguq	asingilnguq	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
asipgak	fcbg[fr	skirt		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)													
\f0\i0 skirt		< asi\super 1\nosupersub -?		CK V & E 90, Rub 96		asipgak	asipgak	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1087 \u1093 \u1072 \u1082 \
asit	fcbn	stitches on the bow of a skin boat on the inner and outer surfaces		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); this is a plural													
\f0\i0 stitches on the bow of a skin boat on the inner and outer surfaces				CK Rub 96		asit	asit	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \
asitmun	fcbnvey	downwards		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 downwards		< asi\super 1\nosupersub -tmun				asitmun	asitmun	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
asivagh-	fcbdf4-	lower		asivaghtuq \'91it went down\'92; asivaghaa \'91he lowered it\'92 /	go down	down (go ~)											to lower; to go down		< asi\super 1\nosupersub -vagh-				asivagh-	asivagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
asivaq	fcbdf2	wind from east			east												east; wind from east		< asi-vagh- (?)				asivaq	asivaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
asivaqun	fcbdf2ey	deeply		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 sleeping deeply												deeply; sleeping deeply		< asi-vagh-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 asivaqun	asivaqun	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
asunan, asunaq	fc/yfy. fc/yf2	soon		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 soon		from Chukchi ?	x			asunan, asunaq	asunan, asunaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 , \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
asunat	fc/yen	only		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 as before or as usual								cf. asunut -- the same? check				only; as before; as usual	njkmrj.gj-ght;ytve	from Chukchi ?	x	Rub. 97		asunat	asunat	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \
asunga	fc/3f	come on		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle	
\f0\i0 you'd better	and also											come on; you'd better; and also		from Chukchi ecenci \'91you\'92d better, and also\'92				asunga	asunga	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \
asunut	fc/yen	only if		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle	
\f0\i0 if only								cf. asunat -- the same? check				only if; if only		from Chukchi ecenut, ecenur \'91it shall be this way\'92				asunut	asunut	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \
asuq	fc/2	flint		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 flint				CK Rub 97		asuq	asuq	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \
asute-	fcens-	exchange wives temporarily		Neghighluku yuget nulighqullghiit taghnughhangenghinneghmeggni yuuk nuliilek aapneghmegteggu nuliitek naavghutaqluku pinalutek taghnughhangnalutek taghnughhiilnguuk. Yugenkuk nulighqullghhik aapsimakegket saaqwlighhaagteng nek 
\f2\i asunnalutek
\f0\i0  yugek. \'91Long ago men with their wives who can\'92t bear children would ask another man to trade wives so that the childless couple could have a child. A man and his wife asked their neighbor if he could 
\f2\i exhanges wives.\'92
\f0\i0  (SULUWET 108)													to temporarily exchange wives 		PE acu-		CK Rub 97; Suluwet 109		asute-	asute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1089 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b ata\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fnf\super \'a1	\nosupersub father		
\f2\i base is 
\f0\i0 ata-: ataka \'91my father\'92													father		PE ata				ata1	ata1	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1072 1\
ataasighhaaghte-	fn6cb565ns-	one (be the only ~ remaining)		ataasighhaaghtuq \'91it was the only one left\'92													to be the only one remaining		< ataasiq-ghhaq-(ng)ughte-				atasighhaghte-	atxsighhxghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1203 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ataasighsigate-	fn6cb5cbufns-	undecided (be ~)															to be undecided		< ataasiq-?-(ng)igate-				atasighsigate-	atxsighsigate-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ataasiighmete-	fn6c74vsns-	single-minded (be ~)															to be single-minded		< ataasiq-?-mete-				atasighmete-	atxsxghmete-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ataasiighte-	fn6c75ns-	make up one\'92s mind		Umyugagka 
\f2\i ataasiightagka
\f0\i0  suflugaq tukfighnaluku. \'91I 
\f2\i made up
\f0\i0  my mind to buy the gun.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 169)	become, or cause to become, one												to become, or cause to become, one; to make up one\'92s mind		< ataasiq-(ng)ughte-				atasighte-	atxsxghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ataasiq	fn6cb2	one		ataasiq qilugtuq \'91one barked\'92; ataasimeng qikmilguunga \'91I have one dog\'92; 
\f2\i the plural
\f0\i0  ataasit, 
\f2\i is used to indicate that a noun, though grammatically plural, actually indicates a single entity (or a single kind of entity); for example, 
\f0\i0 ataasit angyat \'91one boat\'92; ataasit tengegkayuget nalugtut \'91an airplane landed\'92; Whakenwhaa ghhataquvek 
\f2\i mengteghat ataasit
\f0\i0  kaalleqaten. \'91When you leave from here you will arrive at a 
\f2\i single house.
\f0\i0 \'92 (UNIGPAGHAGH. 69); 
\f2\i Ataasit neqet 
\f0\i0 taakut eghqwaaghusaqaqut. \'91For their offerings they used 
\f2\i one and the same kind of food.
\f0\i0 \'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:210); Igleghuteghllagluki 
\f2\i angyat ataasit
\f0\i0 \'85. \'91They moved 
\f2\i one boat 
\f0\i0 a long way (on the ice)\'85.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:116); 
\f2\i the dual,
\f0\i0  ataasik, 
\f2\i is used to indicate that a noun, though grammatically dual, actually does indicate a single entity and not two entities; for example, 
\f0\i0 ataasik salngagek \'91one box\'92; Taagken tawaten uyegsimalutung naanguk qenwat 
\f2\i ataasik
\f0\i0 . \'91The 
\f2\i one
\f0\i0  [case of goods] which we were distributing from ran out.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:126); Naaka pingayugneghneng qiipaghalek. 
\f2\i Ataasik
\f0\i0  qepghaasikek gaaghusikek. \'91My mother had three cloth cover parkas. 
\f2\i One
\f0\i0  was for working and cooking.\'92 (SULUWET 13; 
\f2\i and note that for 
\f0\i0 \'91(one) cloth cover parka\'92, 
\f2\i the dual,
\f0\i0  qiipaghaak, 
\f2\i is often used
\f0\i0  )													one		PE ata3uci3				atasiq	atxsiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ataata	fn6nf	paternal uncle		
\f2\i base is
\f0\i0  ataata-: ataataka \'91my uncle\'92	uncle, paternal												paternal uncle; father's brother		PE ata(a)ta; < ata-?				atata	atxta	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \
ataglaawa	fnfuk91f	rope tied onto sled		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rope tied onto sled		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 97		ataglawa	ataglxwa	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1072 \
atakaghqaq	fnfrf52f2	stepfather			foster-father	adoptive father								father (step, foster of adoptive)			step, foster or adoptive father		< atakaghkaq		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 147		atakaghqaq	atakaghqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
atalgun	fnfkuey	cousin (parallel ~ on father\'92s side)															paternal uncle's child; parallel cousin on father's side		< ata-lgun				atalgun	atalgun	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
Atallghaq	Fnfk]5]f2	Providenia Bay (site in Chokotka west of mouth of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka west of mouth of Providenia Bay						atallghaq	atallghaq	\uc0\u1040 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \
atalughaq	fnfk/4f2	whale blubber (small chunk of ~ with slices made in the fat down to the chewy layer to facilitate eating (by tearing off pieces))		atalughilluku mangtagmeng tuunumakanga \'91she made partially sliced pieces of whale blubber for him to eat\'92									given by A&W in the same form as we already had it!				small chunk of whale blubber with slices made in the fat down to the chewy layer to facilitate eating (by tearing off pieces)				A&W 15		atalughaq	atalughaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
Ataneghpak	Fnfys5gfr	God															God		< ataneq-ghpak				Ataneghpak	Ataneghpak	\uc0\u1040 \u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
ataneq	fnfys2	boss or chief		Yuuk taana 
\f2\i atanqaat
\f0\i0  taakut ulimastet. \'91That man is the 
\f2\i boss
\f0\i0  of the builders.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 35); 
\f2\i Atanghi
\f0\i0  mangtegham llilaghnaqiit. \'91They are going to put up the 
\f2\i main supports
\f0\i0  of the building.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 35)	God	lord								pole (main internal ~ of the traditional dome-shaped house)			boss; chief; lord; God; main internal pole of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		PE atan03 (under PE ata-)				ataneq	ataneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
atanghuyugneq	fnfy4e/uys2	bossy person			person, bossy												bossy person		< ataneq-(ng)u-yug-neq\super 2				\nosupersub atanghuyugneq	atanghuyugneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
atarineq	fnfhbys2	walrus hide (place on a split ~ where the two sides remain attached to each other)			split walrus hide (place on a ~ where the two sides remain attached to each other)												the place on a split walrus hide where the two sides remain attached to each other		PE ata-				atarineq	atarineq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1088 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
ataw	fnf1	do it anyway		
\f2\i particle; Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 give it a try	let's											do it anyway; give it a try; let's		from Chukchi \'91ataw \'91in vain, for nothing\'92		CK Rub 99		ataw	ataw	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \
atawha	fnf1]f	you know		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 you see												you know; you see						atawha	atawha	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \
ategh-	fns4-	go down off of something		ateghtuq \'91he got down\'92 / ateghtaa \'91he took it down, let it down\'92; aatghutaa \'91he brought it down for her, or as he came down\'92; ateghngaaq \'91it has been taken or let down\'92	get down off of something												to go or get down off of something		PE at03- (under PE at(0)-)			ateghaasiq, ateghaate-, atghagh-, atghii, atneghaq, aatneq	ategh-	ategh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 -\
ateghaasiq	fns46cb2	ceremonial clothes		
\f2\i so called because they are used to go down to whale boat for a ceremony	
\f0\i0 clothes, ceremonial												ceremonial clothes		< ateghagh-(u)siq				ateghasiq	ateghxsiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ateghaate-	fns46ns-	go down as a group		ayvelghun ateghaatuq \'91the group of walruses went down together\'92													to go down as a group		< ateghagh-(u)te-				ateghate-	ateghxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ateghagh-	fns4f4-	go down to whale boat for a ceremony marking the beginning of spring hunting															to go down to whale boat for a ceremony marking the beginning of spring hunting		< ategh-?-				ateghagh-	ateghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ateghaq	fns4f2	name, substitute			name (middle ~)	name of household pet											substitute name; middle name; name of household pet		< ateq-ghaq		gloss 3 from Rub 104		ateghaq	ateghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ateghaq	fns4f2	ceremony held in spring to mark the beginning of spring hunting															ceremony held in spring to mark the beginning of spring hunting		< ategh-?-				ateghaq	ateghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ategherkaq	fns4sirf2	mountain spur		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 mountain spur		< ategh-?		CK Rub 104		ategherkaq	ategherkaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1096 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b ateghte-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fns5n-\super \'a1	\nosupersub blow toward the sea		kii, elngaatall tesqakma ateghtaa \'91gee, there is a strong wind blowing toward the sea out there\'92													for wind to blow toward the sea		+PY at03t0- \'91drift with current\'92 (cf. Central Alaskan Yupik at03t0- \'91drift with water current\'92)				ateghte-1	ateghte-1	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub ateghte-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fns5n-\super \'99	\nosupersub put (it) down (into something)		Nulughyaq, kayu pinghani, nefkaaqluku, mesiighqun 
\f2\i ateghtaqluku
\f0\i0 . Uukaq tawaten ama mesiighmun ateghtaqluku ilanga. '[They would go] jigging, when sculpins were present, drying it, and
\f2\i  putting it
\f0\i0  in oil. Cod too, like that they'd sometimes 
\f2\i put
\f0\i0  in oil [to preserve it].' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:244)	put into liquid												to put (it) down (into something); to put into liquid						ateghte-2	ateghte-2	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 -\super 2\
\nosupersub ateligh-	fnskb4-	name (give a ~)		atelighaa \'91he named him\'92													to name		< ateq-ligh-				ateligh-	ateligh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
atengllagh-	fns3k]z4-	devise a name		atengllaghtuq \'91he came up with a name\'92	name (give a ~)	ask								question			to devise a name; ask; question		< ateq-ngllagh-				atengllagh-	atengllagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
atengpa	fns3gf	calling for exchange		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); questioned									
\f0\i0 Tanko says tengpa is \'91to kill reindeer\'92				calling for exchange				CK Rub 104		atengpa	atengpa	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1087 \u1072 \
ateq	fns2	name		aatgha \'91his name\'92; atepiga \'91his real name, his Yupik name\'92; aatqa \'91my name\'92; aatghen \'91your name\'92													name		PE at03			cf. atigh-; > ateghaq, ateligh-, atengllagh-, atiiqe-	ateq	ateq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \
Ateq	Fns2	Atuk Mtn. (and the salty lake near the summit) on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Atuk Mtn. (and the salty lake near the summit) on St. Lawrence Is.		< ategh-				Ateq	Ateq	\uc0\u1040 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \
atgenra	fn[syhf	happened although we no longer wanted it to, or happened too late		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  iitek ighneni qelghwaaghyaghaa angyiisqelluku unaaq, qavaaniluni ighsaaq, atgenra kesiimiita maketuq angyaghnaluni \'91he tried to have his son go boating this morning, he didn\'92t want to go because he was asleep, too late\ul ,\ulnone  after they left, he got up to go boating\'92; atgenra tengegkayuget kaatut uteghsimaghma \'91the airplane got here anyway after I decided not to go back\'92; Elngaatalnguq quunpeng esnighqwaghaqelghii taana Singaaweteghllak. Sameng naalkunnaluni elqwaaghhaghmeng. 
\f2\i Atgenra
\f0\i0  avangisagllak. \'91It is said Singaaweteghllak was so very often combing the beach to try to find some seaweeds. 
\f2\i But
\f0\i0 \ul  
\f2\i \ulnone unfortunately
\f0\i0  there wasn\'92t any.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:236)													it happened although we no longer wanted it to; it happened too late; unfortunately however		from Chukchi \'93echinre\'92w\'92an\'94 \'91oh, goodness\'92				atgenra	atgenra	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1093 \u1099 \u1085 \u1088 \u1072 \
atghaaghqugh-	fn5652e4-	fly south (of birds)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to fly south (of birds)		< atghagh-? (?)		Rub 103		atghaghqugh-	atghxghqugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
atghagh-	fn5f4-	go down toward the beach			go from Chukotka to St. Lawrence Is.												to go down toward the beach; to go from Chukotka to St. Lawrence Is.		PE at3a3- (under PE at03-); < ategh-?-		Chap. to Gamb. meaning from Linda Badten		atghagh-	atghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
atghagha-	fn5f4f-	dive into deep water and stay there for a long time without coming up for air															to dive into deep water and stay there for a long time without coming up for air		< atghagh-?-				atghagha-	atghagha-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 -\
atghaghtegh-	fn5f5ns4-	take one\'92s hunting equipment down to the beach preparatory to going out hunting by boat															to take one\'92s hunting equipment down to the beach preparatory to going out hunting by boat		< atghagh-?-		CK Rub 103 CK		atghaghtegh-	atghaghtegh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 -\
Atghii	Fn57	slope (a certain ~ east of Gambell which dogteams used to use as a route down into the village)															a certain slope east of Gambell which dogteams used to use as a route down into the village		< ategh-?				Atghi	Atghx	\uc0\u1040 \u1090 \u1203 \u1251 \
atghii	fn57	slope, gradual															gradual slope		< ategh-?				atghi	atghx	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u1251 \
atghii-	fn57-	go down (the hill) gradually		atghiiguq \'91he went down (the hill) gradually\'92; atghiigaa \'91he went down on it gradually\'92 / Uusneghwaaq tevluku 
\f2\i atghiiyami
\f0\i0  sukangitesighwaaghumalghii. \'91After going over the small hill, when he 
\f2\i went gradually down
\f0\i0 , he made the pretense of going slowly.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 69) 	down (go ~ gradually)												to go down (the hill) gradually		< ategh-?-				atghi-	atghx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u1251 -\
atghilegtaaq	fn5bks[n62	contest of strength in which contestants pull each other's hooked middle fingers															a contest of strength in which contestants pull each other's hooked middle fingers		< atghilek-?				atghilegtaq	atghilegtxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
atghilek	fn5bksr	middle finger			finger (middle ~)												middle finger		PY alqiliq				atghilek	atghilek	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
atghilengestaq	fn5bks3scnf2	middle toe		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 toe, middle												middle toe		 < atghilek-ngestaq		CK Rub 104		atghilengestaq	atghilengestaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
atghilgun	fn5bkuey	loop for middle finger at end of a sling		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 loop for middle finger at end of a sling		< atghilek-(u)n		CK Rub 104		atghilgun	atghilgun	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \

\f1\b atigh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fnb4-\super \'a1	\nosupersub name (give a ~)		atighaa panini naamineng \'91he named his daughter after his mother\'92													to name		< ateq-ligh-				atigh-1	atigh-1	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub atigh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fnb4-\'99	say		atighaa \'91he said it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ateq													to say						atigh-2	atigh-2	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub atightugh-	fnb5ne4-	read		atightughtuq \'91he read\'92; atightughaa \'91he read it\'92 / atightughyaghqat \'91things to be read such as brochures, magazines, pamphlets, etc.\'92; atightughyuggaaghusit \'91the first reader\'92 
\f2\i (name of a Yupik primer)													
\f0\i0 to read		< atigh-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				atightugh-	atightugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
atightulleq	fnb5nek]s2	reading (way of ~)		
\f2\i usually plural
\f0\i0 , atightullghet, 
\f2\i for reading material
\f0\i0 ; aghnaghaam atightullgha pinightuq \'91her way of reading is nice\'92	reading material												way of reading; reading material		< atightugh-lleq				atightulleq	atightulleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
atiiqe-	fn72s-	name someone after		atiiqaa naani \'91he named someone after his mother\'92													to name someone after		< atigh\super 1\nosupersub -?-				atiqe-	atxqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1251 \u1179 \u1099 -\
atipallagh-	fn7gfk]z4-	single out		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 shade in	emphasize							is this a good definition?				to single out; to shade in; to emphasize		< atigh\super 2\nosupersub -?-		CK Rub 100		atipallagh-	atipallagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1251 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
atkug-	fnreu-	put on a parka		atkugtuq \'91he put on a parka\'92; atkugaa \'91he put a parka on her\'92 /	parka (put on a ~)												to put on a parka		PE at0k0 and at0ku!				atkug-	atkug-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \u1075 -\
atkuk	fnrer	parka		
\f2\i also dual for one, especially for a bird skin and feathers parka:
\f0\i0  atkugegka \'91my parka\'92													parka		PE at0k0 and at0ku!				atkuk	atkuk	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \
atkuraaghllak	fnreh65k]zr	sheepskin coat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 akuraaghllagek
\f2\i , for one coat
\f0\i0  	coat, sheepskin												sheepskin coat		< atkuk-raaq-ghllak		CK Rub 101		atkuraghllak	atkurxghllak	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \u1088 \u257 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
atkuraaq	fnreh62	garment made from sealskin with European material sewed on it		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 atkuraaghek
\f2\i ,  for one such garment													
\f0\i0 garment made from sealskin with European material sewed on it		< atkuk-raaq		CK Rub 101		atkuraq	atkurxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
atkuyaak	fnre9r	dress		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  atkuyaagek,
\f2\i  for one such garment	
\f0\i0 shirt								in Rub 101, this is \'91men\'92s shirt\'92				dress; shirt		< atkuk-yaak				atkuyak	atkuyxk	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
atkuyaaq	fnre92	dress			Euro-American style garment	garment, Euro-American style											dress; Euro-American style garment		< atkuk-?				atkuyaq	atkuyxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
atneghaq	fny]s4f2	point of land			cape												point of land; cape		< ategh-neq\super 2\nosupersub -ghaq				atneghaq	atneghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
Atneghaq	Fny]s4f2	site at Northwest Cape Gambell		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site at Northwest Cape near Gambell		< ategh-neq\super 2\nosupersub -ghaq				Atneghaq	Atneghaq	\uc0\u1040 \u1090 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
atngaghun	fn3]f4ey	tattoo (woman's ~ on the sides of her nose)		Iik, iluuq, nayaka tugunayaghan estamaneng 
\f2\i atngaghutelek
\f0\i0  \'91Look, pal, you can take my sister who has four 
\f2\i tatoo
\f0\i0  lines on her nose\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:8); = atngaghutaq	seam (front ~ with piping on skin-boot)												woman's tattoo on the sides of her nose; front seam with piping on skin-boot		PE al&a3(-) and postbase -(u)n				atngaghun	atngaghun	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
atngaghusigh-	fn3]f4ecb4-	tattoo on the side of the nose															to tattoo on the side of the nose		< atngaghun-ligh-				atngaghusigh-	atngaghusigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
atngaghutaq	fn3f4enf2	tattoo (woman's ~ on the sides of her nose)		= atngaghun	seam (front ~ with piping on skin-boot)												woman's tattoo on the sides of her nose; front seam with piping on skin-boot		PE al&a3(-) and postbase -(u)taq				atngaghutaq	atngaghutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
atngaghutelek, atngaghutalek	fn3]f4ensksr. fn3]f4enfksr	dog with a "masked" face															dog with a "masked" face		< atngaghun-lek, atngaghutaq-lek				atngaghutelek, atngaghutalek	atngaghutelek, atngaghutalek	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 , \u1072 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
Atqalghhaaghmii(t)	Fn2fk]5f4vb\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< ?-mii			xxxt	Atqalghhaghmi(t)	Atqalghhxghmx(t)	\u1040 \u1090 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 (\u1090 )\
Atqallghaq	Fn2fk]5f2	former village between Cape Stoletia and Cape Lesovskogo in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village between Cape Stoletia and Cape Lesovskogo in Chukotka						Atqallghaq	Atqallghaq	\uc0\u1040 \u1090 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
atugh-	fne4-	use			sing												to use; to sing	gjkmpencz\\ ...	PE atu3-		CK V & E 137 (Rus Voc)	atughta, atuun, atuqumtaaq	atugh-	atugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
atughta	fne5nf	singer of Eskimo songs															singer of Eskimo songs		< atugh-(s)ta				atughta	atughta	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
atunekiite-	fneysr7ns-	make equal in some sense		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 kingutkat atunekiitaqut sivulighnun \'91the ones who came in late are getting themselves equal to the first ones\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  atunem													to make equal in some sense				CK Rub 102		atunekite-	atunekxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
atunem	fneysv	together		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 yupiklu laluramkallu neghuutuk atunem \'91the Yupik Eskimo and the white man ate together\'92; Unaami nunamnnun aglaghhaakut. Wiin iteghaalluta nayagput tagimaluku, enkaam 
\f2\i atunem
\f0\i0  neghelghaakut. \'91Let\'92s go to our village tomorrow. But for now, let\'92s go inside while our sister is coming, then let\'92s eat 
\f2\i together
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 22); Tawaten igleghteghngaaghmeng tekeghaq qemighyuk inga aliighaat, iiwen qemighyugmeng taagken mayughaqut, amaken yugemllu 
\f2\i atunem. Atunem
\f0\i0  aliighutut. \'91As they were going, they were approaching a hill on a point; just as they were climbing the hill, a man 
\f2\i at the same time
\f0\i0  was coming from the other side. They appeared to each other 
\f2\i at the same time.\'92
\f0\i0  (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:124)	simultaneously												together; simultaneously		PE atun0m				atunem	atunem	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \
atungak	fne3fr	hide of sea mammal (especially bearded seal)		
\f2\i of bearded seal or female walrus, use for boat covering, as a mat, as boot-sole material, etc.; cf. 
\f0\i0 atungaq; 
\f2\i Atungagmeng
\f0\i0  aangelghiimeng, amsakaghtameng, iwhanimeng nateghqaqegkayuguyaghpetut. \'91Large, or small, 
\f2\i bearded seal hides
\f0\i0  were used for making the soles of mukluks.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:98)	bearded seal or other sea mammal skin before it is dried								bearded seal skin in Rub 102				hide of sea mammal (especially bearded seal); bearded seal or other sea mammal skin before it is dried						atungak	atungak	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \
atungaq	fne3f2	sole of boot			boot sole												sole of boot		PE atu&a3				atungaq	atungaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \
atunraaq	fneyh62	skin of a young bearded seal 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 bearded seal, young, skin												skin of a young bearded seal 				CK Rub 102		atunraq	atunrxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
atuq	fne2	useful thing		atii aatkat nutaghaagut \'91the clothes she is wearing are new\'92; ighneghma atii ulimghusit angagan tuunkaqii \'91the tools my son is using were given to him by his uncle\'92; Enkaangaam naqam enra-aq 
\f2\i atuq
\f0\i0  taana, yupigem 
\f2\i ataa
\f0\i0  igleghutaqeftaat salin. \'91And then there was 
\f2\i singing
\f0\i0 , Eskimo 
\f2\i singing
\f0\i0 , and they continued to do that.\'92 (PANGEGH. 21)	thing being used	singing											useful thing; thing being used; singing		PE atu3-				atuq	atuq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \
atuqe-	fne2s-	wear		atuqaa \'91he wore it or used it \'91/	use												to wear; to use		< atuq-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				atuqe-	atuqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
atuqumtaaq	fne2evn62	thing that is frequently used			frequently used thing	used (thing that is frequently ~)											thing that is frequently used		< atugh-qumtaaq				atuqumtaq	atuqumtxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
atuun; atuuta	fn8y. fn8nf	Eskimo song			song, Eskimo												Eskimo song		< atugh-(u)n				atun; atuta	atxn; atxta	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1263 \u1085 , \u1072 \u1090 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \
Atuuylaap	Fn8qk9g	Venus		
\f2\i apparently this is the only Yupik word that ends in p	
\f0\i0 Evening Star (the ~)								check to see how this could be used in a sentence, as atuuylaape?				Venus; the Evening Star		from Chukchi \'93HIto-Lap\'94 according to Bogoras (\'93The Chukchee\'94, Vol. II, pg. \'a31\'a2)	14			Atuylap	Atxylxp	\uc0\u1040 \u1090 \u1263 \u1253 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1087 \
atwhay	fn1]fq	oh yes, now I remember what it was I wanted to say		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  atwhay aqfaaghhnaken puygukan \'91oh yes, would you please get that thing which you had forgotten\'92; Angyat entaqun 
\f2\i atwhay
\f0\i0  kaatkaagutlu. Aghnalguutqun tawani tumighqaataqngamta maaken. \'91A boat probably arrived too,
\f2\i  I remember.
\f0\i0  They had women there when we went across to Siberia.\'92 (PANGEGH. 32); Seghleghhalek elngaatall upughaat. Atalgukaghaa taana 
\f2\i atwhaynguq
\f0\i0  nulighhituq. \'91How great, they were very hospitable to him. 
\f2\i Oh yeah!
\f0\i0  It is said his cousin had no wife.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. III:33)	rember (oh yes, now I ~ what it was I wanted to say)												oh yes, now I remember what it was I wanted to say		from Chukchi ?	x			atwhay	atwhay	\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \u1253 \
ava	fdf	cyst															cyst		PE av9a3				ava	ava	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \
avaagh-	fd64-	relieved of pain (be ~)		Ineghteghngaatni mekelghiighhaam umyugaghhaagkeneng 
\f2\i avaaghigalnguq
\f0\i0  aligatellgha naayghamun. \'91Even though they warned him against it, the little boy\'92s desire to go up the mountain never 
\f2\i slackened
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 49)	pain (be relieved of ~)	slacken (rain, snow, traffic)								diminish			to be relieved of pain; to slacken (rain, snow, traffic); to diminish		PE ava-		VK		avagh-	avxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u257 \u1271 -\
avaaneghlluk	fd6ys5k]/r	pain, persistent unrelieved															persistent unrelieved pain		< avaagh-neq\super 1\nosupersub -lluk				avaneghlluk	avxneghlluk	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
avagh-	fdf4-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > avaghqaghhiigute-, avamsuggaq, avaqraggiighute-, aviighute-																			avagh-	avagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
avaghniighqe-	fdf4y752s-	smell good		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check length of i; cf. avaghnite-; check				to smell good 	bplfdfnm ghbznysq pfgf[ \'f8j gbot\uc0\u960 			Rub. 15		avaghnighqe-	avaghnxghqe-	\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
avaghnite-	fdf4ybns-	fermented (be ~)															to be fermented				VK		avaghnite-	avaghnite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
avaghqaghhiighute-	fdf52f574ens-	nothing left (for there to be ~)															for there to be nothing left		< avagh-?-(ng)i:ghute-				avaghqaghhighute-	avaghqaghhxghute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
avamsuggaq*	fdfvc/[f2	nothing at all															nothing at all		< avagh-msuggaq				avamsuggaq*	avamsuggaq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
avamsuggiite-	fdfvc/[7ns-	none (be or have ~)		avamsuggiituq \'91there's none left at all\'92	nothing at all (be ~)												to be or have none; to be nothing at all		< avamsuggaq-(ng)ite-				avamsuggite-	avamsuggxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Avan	Fdfy	former village in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices; see also 
\f0\i0 Avatmiit	East Head												former village in Chukotka; East Head						Avan	Avan	\uc0\u1040 \u1074 \u1072 \u1085 \
avangite-	fdf3bns-	lack something		avangilnguq \'91one who doesn\'92t have something, or is lacking things in general\'92	none (have ~)												to lack something; to have none	jncencndjdfnm e rjuj--k> \'f8ghb jndtnt yf djghjc\uc0\u960 	PY-S ava&it0-		Rub. 16		avangite-	avangite-	\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
avangunani	fdf3eyfyb	without something		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 without having something	with nothing											without something; without having something; with nothing	,tp xtuj-k>. yt bvtz xtuj-k>. yb c xtv	< avangite-
\f2\i subordinative		
\f0\i0 Rub. 16		avangunani	avangunani	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
avaqraggiighute-	fdf2if[74ens-	nothing left															for there to be nothing left		< avagh-?-				avaqraggighute-	avaqraggxghute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1093 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
avaqutaghaq	fdf2enf4f2	skin boat part (upper part of rib?)											which part?				part of a skin boat (upper part of rib?)		< avaqutaq-ghaq				avaqutaghaq	avaqutaghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
avaqutaghllulghii	fdf2enf5k]/k47	woman who gives birth only to children that die															a woman who gives birth only to children that die		< avaqutaq-lluk-lghii				avaqutaghllulghi	avaqutaghllulghx	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
avaqutalqusiq	fdf2enfk]2ecb2	child (offspring, approx. 3-10 year old)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 child (offspring, approx. 3-10 years old)	ht,tyjr (3-10 ktn)	< avaqutaq-lqusiq		CK V & E 74		avaqutalqusiq	avaqutalqusiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
avaqutaq	fdf2enf2	child		avaqutanka \'91my children\'92; avaqutalguuq \'91he has children\'92; avaqutiituq \'91he has no children\'92	offspring												child (offspring)		PY avaqutaq				avaqutaq	avaqutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
avaquti-	fdf2enb-	birth (give ~)		avuqutiiq \'91she gave birth\'92	child (give birth to a ~)												to have a child; to give birth		< avaqutaq-li-				avaquti-	avaquti-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1080 -\
avara-	fdfhf-	comfort		avaraaq \'91she kept her mind off something unpleasant\'92; iilqelghiit avaranaqumanginaghluteng pinightut \'91it is good to try to cheer up those who are depressed\'92; avaranaluki naghaaghtestaqluki pineghlliqelleghqiitneng \'91in order to distract them from going astray, let them play\'92; avarasqelluku laalighfikaa \'91she visited her to cheer her up\'92	distract	cheer up							check; explained: as seghleliilghiinun, quyanghilghughnun averngustinaqa, which VK translates as \'91trying to cheer up someone who is going through grief or unhappiness\'92	keep one\'92s mind off something unpleasant			to keep one\'92s mind off something unpleasant; to comfort; to distract; to cheer up				A&W 16		avara-	avara-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 -\
Avatmii(t) 	Fdfnv7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< Avan-mii			xxxt	Avatmi(t) 	Avatmx(t) 	\u1040 \u1074 \u1072 \u1090 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
avayaq	fdfz2	branch			prong on reindeer antler												branch; prong on reindeer antler		PY-S avayaq				avayaq	avayaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1103 \u1179 \
aveg-	fdsu-	divide		avegtuq \'91it divided in two\'92; aavgaa \'91he divided it, split it\'92 / aavgutuq neqmeng \'91he cut off or separated some food for himself\'92; aavgutaa aghnaq \'91he divided in two, giving half to the woman\'92	halve												to divide; to halve		PE av0!-			aafkagh-, avegtugh-, avenqaq, aavgugh-, aavneq	aveg-	aveg-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1075 -\
avegtugh-	fds[ne4-	dice meat		avegtughtuq \'91he sliced up some meat\'92; avegtughaa \'91he sliced it up\'92 / 	cut up meat into bite size pieces	slice meat											to dice meat; to cut up meat into bite size pieces; to slice meat		< aveg-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				avegtugh-	avegtugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
avegtughaataq	fds[ne46nf2	tobacco pouch			pouch for tobacco												tobacco pouch		< avegtughaq-(u)taq				avegtughataq	avegtughxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
avegtughaq	fds[ne4f2	tidbit of food		Aghnam pimakanga, "Ataasighhaq naasiiqaghhu." Taagken mekelghiighem ataasiq 
\f2\i avegtughaq
\f0\i0  neghumakanga. \'91The woman said to him, \'93Try one little bit.\'94 And then the boy ate one 
\f2\i tidbit of food
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 53)	pipe tobacco												tidbit of food; pipe tobacco		< avegtugh-aq				avegtughaq	avegtughaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
avek	fdsr	half		aavga \'91half of it\'92													half		PE av0!-				avek	avek	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1082 \

\f1\b avelemki-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fdsksvrb-\super \'a1	\nosupersub unconcious (become ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)	
\f0\i0 consciousness (lose ~)												to become unconscious	nthzncz. cetnbncz			CK V & E 154; Rub 19		avelemki-1	avelemki-1	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1080 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub avelemki-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fdsksvrb-\super \'99	\nosupersub rush		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 ellnga avelemkiiquq angyaghpagmun \'91he is rushing to the ship\'92	bustle about												to rush; to bustle about				CK Rub 19		avelemki-2	avelemki-2	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1080 -\super 2\
\nosupersub avelghagh-	fdsk4f4-	not go to an event		avelghaghtuq \'91he missed something, didn't go\'92; avelghaghaa \'91he left him alone, didn\'92t include him/it\'92 / avelghiigatut \'91they never missed the opportunity [to do something]\'92; Aghhunneghagu 
\f2\i avelghaghpenateng
\f0\i0  navek piiqluteng. \'91Every day without 
\f2\i missing an opportunity
\f0\i0  they would go out somewhere.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:244)	miss an event	avoid								not include			to not go to an event; to miss an event; to leave out; to not include; to avoid						avelghagh-	avelghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
avelghaqiinagh-	fdsk4f27yf4-	ignore		avelghaqiinaghaa \'91he ignored him or it\'92													to ignore		< avelghagh-qiinagh-				avelghaqinagh-	avelghaqxnagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
avenagh-	fdsyf4-	energetic (be ~)		avenaghtuq \'91he is full of pep\'92 /	pep (be full of ~)												to be energetic; to be full of pep						avenagh-	avenagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
avenaq	fdsyf2	energetic person															energetic person						avenaq	avenaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
aveniqe-	fdsyb2s-	rush		aveniquq \'91he is acting energetically\'92	hurry	act energetically											to rush; to be in a hurry; to act energetically	njhjgbnmcz. cgtibnm	< avenaq-liqe-		Rub. 19; VK		aveniqe-	aveniqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
avenqaayuk	fdsy26/r	fellow clan member															fellow clan member		< avenqaq-?-				avenqayuk	avenqxyuk	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1085 \u1179 \u257 \u1102 \u1082 \
avenqaq	fdsy2f2	partition			fellow clan member												partition; fellow clan member		< aveg-?- (?)				avenqaq	avenqaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
averngu-	fdsh3e-	distract or be distracted from one's problems or bad tendencies		avernguuq \'91he is distracting himself from his trouble or grief as by thinking about something else or keeping busy\'92; averngwaa (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  averngustaa) \'91he is distracting him\'92 / seghletun pinaqelghiineng avaralghiit sameng pinilghiimeng pistaqluki llaaghanwha averngustaqiit nelliqelleghqiitneng \'91it is good to distract those who might do wrong by leading them toward something enjoyable\'92									the last example is from A&W 16; it should be checked				to distract or be distracted from one's problems or bad tendencies						averngu-	averngu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1091 -\
aveyugsagh-	fds/[cf4-	urge to hurry		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 angyallightem aveyugsaghaqaa sivuyagta guutesqelluku \'91the captain is telling the front man to hurry up and shoot\'92													to urge to hurry				CK Rub 20		aveyugsagh-	aveyugsagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1102 \u1093 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 -\
avi-	fdb-			
\f2\i root;  
\f0\i0 > aviigh-, aviite-, aviighute-															cf. PE av(v)a3i3-				avi-	avi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1080 -\
avighaate-	fdb46ns-	obsessed (be ~)		avighaatuq \'91he keeps thinking about something\'92; avighaataa \'91he keeps thinking about it, can't get it out of his mind\'92 / ilagaan aghnelqusiq avilghaatkumakanga \'91he thought about the song all day\'92	recurrent thoughts (have ~)												to have something keep coming to mind; to not be able to get thoughts out of one's mind; to be obsessed						avighate-	avighxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b avii-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fd7-\'a1	ring (of the ears)		aviiguq \'91he has a ringing in his ears, his ears are ringing; it (ear) is ringing\'92													to have a ringing in one's ears; to ring (of the ears)						avi-1	avx-1	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1251 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub avii-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fd7-\'99	signal (with a flag or with shouts)		yuggaq mangteghamun uuglluni aviiquuq \'91the man climbed to the roof of the house and shouted to announce something\'92													to signal (with a flag or with shouts)						avi-2	avx-2	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1251 -\super 2\
\nosupersub aviigh-	fd74-	wipe		aviightuq \'91he wiped something\'92; aviighaa \'91he wiped it\'92 / aviighusiq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aviighusqaq \'91wiping rag\'92													to wipe		PE av(v)a3i3-; < avi-(ng)igh-				avigh-	avxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 -\
aviighute-	fd74ens-	not be there anymore		Qilagwaaghllak aganlenguq 
\f2\i aviighutuq
\f0\i0 . \'91The dark cloud over there 
\f2\i disappeared
\f0\i0 \'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 38); Aghnaq 
\f2\i aviighusimaaq
\f0\i0 . \'91The lady has 
\f2\i passed away
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 38)	die	disappear											to not be there anymore; to die; to disappear		< avagh-(ng)i:ghute-			aviighutekesta(a)gh- \'91to fade\'92 (acc. Rub.)	avighute-	avxghute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aviilghwaaq	fd7k4162	cry of whale or bearded seal															cry of whale or bearded seal		< avii\super 2\nosupersub -?		CK Nagai CK		avilghwaq	avxlghwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1083 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
aviilleq	fd7k]s2	absence		aviillgha \'91its absence\'92; 
\f2\i used in possessed localis, but with absolutive subject of underlying verb rather than with relative possessor:
\f0\i0  Yuuk aviilghani, iitghumalghii. \'91When the man was away, it hid.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 66)													absence		< aviite-lleq				avilleq	avxlleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
aviin	fd7y	song that women perfom when a whale has been caught		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf.
\f0\i0  iviiq													song that women perfom when a whale has been caught				CK Rub 17		avin	avxn	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1085 \
aviite-	fd7ns-	absent		aviituq \'91he or it is gone\'92 /	gone	not be here											to be absent; to be gone; to not be here	jncencndenm jncencnde/obq d lfyyjv vtcnt \'f8ctktybb. ljvt. yf ,thtue b n>g>	< avi-(ng)ite- (?)		CK V & E 133  (Russ voc)		avite-	avxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
avlawa	fdkz1f	flour		Akilpegaghniighluta apeghiighyamta, tent-a (tiinta), qawaagniikghusiq, suflugaq, egllu, 
\f2\i avlawa
\f0\i0 , iingunaqaghtaan tukfightughaa sameng nuughyaghqaagpenanga, \'85 \'91We traded and in the end he had bought a tent, shotgun, rifle, stove, and 
\f2\i flour
\f0\i0 , so I would not lack anything, \'85\'92  (SIVUQAM. NANGAGH. 2:60); = evlawa													flour		from English \'91flour\'92	SLI			avlawa	avlawa	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1083 \u1103 \u1265 \u1072 \
avlegh-	fdks4-	legs spread		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  avleghtuq \'91he spread his legs\'92; avleghtaa \'91he spread its legs open\'92; avleghngaaq \'91he has his legs spread\'92; avleghngalghiik \'91an open pliers, scissors, etc.\'92	spread (legs or parts jointed at one end ~ at the other end)												with legs spread; with parts which are joined at one end spread apart at the other end		PE avl03-				avlegh-	avlegh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
avleghmete-	fdks4vsns-	bow-legged (be ~)			spread apart widely (though attached at one end) (be ~)												to be bow-legged; to be spread apart widely (though attached at one end)	hfcnjgshtyysq. hfcrjhzxtyysq	< avlegh-mete-		Rub. 17		avleghmete-	avleghmete-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
avleqaghtaq	fdks2f5nf2	bola		
\f2\i also used in the plural 
\f0\i0 avleqaghtat 
\f2\i for one bola													
\f0\i0 bola		< avleqaghte-aq				avleqaghtaq	avleqaghtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
avleqaghte-	fdks2f5ns-	bola (use a ~ to try to catch)		avleqaghtaa \'91she used a bola to catch it\'92 / avleqaghsimakanga \'91he did use a bola on it\'92													to use a bola to try to catch		< avlegh-?-				avleqaghte-	avleqaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Avrugaq	Fdheuf2	Pungokosit Spit (site on ~ by Niyrakpak Lagoon on St. Laawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on Pungokosit Spit by Niyrakpak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.						Avrugaq	Avrugaq	\uc0\u1040 \u1074 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
avugh-	fde4-	sort		avughtuq \'91he sorted things, set some aside\'92; avughii \'91he sorted them, set them (or some of them) asid\'92e / avughyaghqat \'91things to be sorted\'92; avuutaa \'91he sorted things for her\'92	set aside some												to sort; to sort out and set aside		PY-S avu3-				avugh-	avugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1091 \u1271 -\
avun	fdey	cause		avutnga \'91the cause of it\'92	excuse	reason behind something											cause; excuse; reason behind something		PE avun				avun	avun	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1091 \u1085 \
avuteghqe-	fdens52s-	regret		avuteghquq \'91he regrets something\'92 / avuteghqutkaa \'91he regrets it\'92													to regret		< avun-?-				avuteghqe-	avuteghqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
avutke-	fdenrs-	blame		avutkaa \'91he blamed her\'92													to blame					< avun-ke\super 1\nosupersub -	avutke-	avutke-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
avyaawi-	fdm91b-	careless (be ~)		avyaawiiq \'91he is being careless\'92 / avyaawiiqelghiit enkaam pituumangigalnguut \'91they misuse things and so they end up with nothing\'92	wasteful (be ~)	misuse things							check, but it sounds okay; explained as: itagsingilnguq, iganaqaq, gaymaawi, which VK translates as \'91to be careless; taking things for granted; not being thrifty\'92				to be careless; to be wasteful; to misuse things		from Chukchi ?	x	A&W 16; VK		avyawi-	avyxwi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1074 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1080 -\
aw-	f1-	over there		
\f2\i obscured demonstrative base; only the demonstrative adverb forms exist and not any corresponding demonstrative pronoun forms; 
\f0\i0 > awaliq, awani, awata, awatghute-, awatiigh-, awatmun, awavagh-, aawhkaghhaani, aawhkaghtaq, aawhkan, aawhkayaghaq;													over there		PE dem. av-				aw-	aw-	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 -\
awakaghaani	f1frf46yb	other side (right on the ~ of it)		unaami awakaghaani \'91the day after tomorrow\'92	next day (on the very ~)												right on the other side of it; on the very next day	1. nfv 2. yf cktle/obq ltym	< awa(ni)-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -kaghaq-
\f2\i possessed localis		
\f0\i0 CK V  & E 116 russ  vocab		awakaghani	awakaghxni	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1085 \u1080 \
awakaghniimna	f1frf4ybvyf	previous one		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle	
\f0\i0 day before												the previous one; on the day before	ght;ybq\\ gjpfdxthfiybq	< awa(ni)-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -kaghaq-
\f2\i localis 
\f0\i0 + imna (coumpound word)		CK V & E 125		awakaghnimna	awakaghnxmna	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
awaligh-	f1fkb4-	bring over food as a sign of friendship or if there is a need for food		awalightuq \'91he brought over food \'91/ 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 awa(ni)													to bring over food as a sign of friendship or if there is a need for food						awaligh-	awaligh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
awalighaq	f1fkb4f2	drifting ice outside of the pack ice			ice (drifting ~ outside of the pack ice)												drifting ice outside of the pack ice		< awaliq-ghaq				awalighaq	awalighaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
awalighhaq	f1fkb5f2	other side (one right on the ~ of something)															the one right on the other side of something		< awaliq-ghhaq				awalighhaq	awalighhaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
awalighneq	f1fkb4ys2	other side		awalighneghani \'91on the other side of it\'92													the other side		< awa(ni)-lighneq				awalighneq	awalighneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
awaliisaq	f1fk7cz2	food or other item brought over as a gift		Asagma 
\f2\i awaliisaa
\f0\i0  neghsam neqanga gaaghaqa. \'91I cooked the seal meat my aunt 
\f2\i brought over
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 39)	gift (food or other item brought over as a ~)												food or  other item brought over as a gift		< awaligh-(u)saq				awalisaq	awalxsaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
awaliq	f1fkb2	one on the other side			other side (one on the ~)												the one on the other side		< awa(ni)-liq				awaliq	awaliq	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
awalmik	f1fkvbr	husk (?)		\'93
\f2\i Awalmiggaghmeng
\f0\i0  saghnaaqitek," piiqiinkut. 
\f2\i Awalmiggaghmeng
\f0\i0  saghnaaqelghiikut. Taakwani sangwaat masugkwaaghhaat. Kaannemta estegmineng nusugluku uyghaggaq qateghrakegtaq, aghneghllak una 
\f2\i awalmik
\f0\i0  peqaghhaat lliluki 
\f2\i awalmiggaat
\f0\i0  taakut. \'91\'93Gather little 
\f2\i husks
\f0\i0 ,\'94 he told us. We gathered little the little 
\f2\i husks
\f0\i0 . Also, some sort of fibrous old roots. When we arrived he pulled from his pocket a little whitish stone, and all day he\'92d array the 
\f2\i husks 
\f0\i0 and tundra moss with the 
\f2\i husks
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:146)													husk (?)		< awata-mik				awalmik	awalmik	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
awani 	f1fyb	over there at a distance		
\f2\i demonstrative adverb, localis case; anaphoric localis adverb:
\f0\i0  taawani \'91there, over there at a distance\'92													over there at a distance		PE dem. av-; <  aw-
\f2\i dem. adverb former (a)				
\f0\i0 awani 	awani 	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
awata	f1fnf	area on the other side		mangtegham awatangani (awatngani) \'91in the area on the other side of the house\'92; awatanganeng 
\f2\i or 
\f0\i0 awatnganeng \'91from the other side of it\'92; 
\f2\i Awatangani
\f0\i0  mangteghaghput taaqegkaaguq. \'91Our house was finished 
\f2\i last year
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 39)	other side (area on the ~)	last year								year (last ~)			area on the other side; last year		< awa(ni)-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -				awata	awata	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \
awataghpak	f1fnf5gfr	sealskin float or poke			float, sealskin	poke, sealskin											sealskin float or poke		PE avata3 and postbase -ghpak				awataghpak	awataghpak	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
awataghpawaaq	f1fnf5gf162	cumulous cloud		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 acorn	cloud, cumulous											cumulous cloud; acorn		< awataghpak-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK Rub 106		awataghpawaq	awataghpawxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
awataghpi-	f1fnf5gb-	make a sealskin float or poke		Neghsapigmeng unanglunga 
\f2\i awataghpiiqa
\f0\i0 . \'91I caught a seal and 
\f2\i made it into a poke
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 118)													to make a sealskin float or poke		< awataghpak-i\super 2\nosupersub -				awataghpi-	awataghpi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1080 -\
awatangani	f1fnf3fyb	last year		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 last year	d ghjikjv ujle`	< awa(ni)-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -
\f2\i possessed localis		
\f0\i0 CK V & E 116 russ vocab		awatangani	awatangani	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
awatghute-	f1fn5ens-	over (jump or otherwise pass ~ (it))		awatghutuq \'91it missed the mark going over it\'92 awatghutaa \'91it went over it\'92 / neghsaq guutkani awatghutaa \'91he shot at the seal but the bullet went over it\'92; Milughyaqminigu -- milunghatni legan nalugutaqelghii ulaagha awatghulluku. \'91When she threw it at it, whenever she threw her woman\'92s-knife at it, she 
\f2\i missed 
\f0\i0 hitting it when the knife landed.\'92 (QATEP. 20)	overshoot	jump or otherwise pass over (it)								miss the mark by going over			to overshoot; to jump or otherwise pass over (it); to miss the mark by going over (it)		< awa(ni)-tghute-				awatghute-	awatghute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
awatiigh-	f1fn74-	lose something by its escaping		awatiightuq \'91he lost something\'92; awatiighaa \'91he lost it\'92 / awatiiqaq \'91one that escaped\'92; unkusenka awatiighumalghiit \'91my trap lost something when it escaped from the trap\'92													to lose something by its escaping		< awa(ni)-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -(ng)igh-				awatigh-	awatxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1251 \u1271 -\
awatiitek 	f1fn7nsr	anchor thong (twin looped ~ attached to flippers of a sealskin harpoon-line float)															twin looped anchor thong attached to flippers of a sealskin harpoon-line float		< awatagh(pak)-(u)n-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 awatitek 	awatxtek 	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
awatkaghtaq	f1fnrf5nf2	thing of last year or the other side			last year (thing of ~)	other side (thing of ~)											thing of last year; thing from the other side		< awa(ni)-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -kaghtaq				awatkaghtaq	awatkaghtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
awatmiighte-	f1fnv75ns-	go farther away (especially of something drifting away)															to go farther away (especially of something drifting away)		< awa(ni)-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -?-				awatmighte-	awatmxghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1084 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
awatmun	f1fnvey	toward over there		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 over there (toward ~)												toward over there		< awa(ni)-tmun				awatmun	awatmun	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
awavagh-	f1fdf4-	move farther away		unaghsighhaq miluutkaqa qagim awavaataa \'91the wave caused the stick I threw to drift further out\'92; siku awavaghtuq \'91the ice drifted out\'92; umegneq awavaghaqaa \'91the snow storm is dying down\'92	drift out	carry or take farther away											to move farther away; to drift out; to carry or take farther away; to calm down (of weather)		< awa(ni)-vagh-				awavagh-	awavagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
awaziq	f1fpb2	relative (kin)		awaziqluku yimikumanghitaqa \'91since she is a relative I wasn\'92t shy with her\'92; awaziqluku ayuqan yiminiituq tukuqelleghqaa \'91since she is your relative you should feel at home when she\'92s your host\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  awa(ni)	fellow clan member	clan member (fellow ~)							check, but sound okay; explained as: tuungqaq, ilakwaaq, which VK translates as \'91relative, of the same clan\'92				relative (kin); fellow clan member				A&W 16		awaziq	awaziq	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1179 \
awen	f1sy	usually		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  awen tagiiquq \'91he usually comes\'92; 
\f2\i Awen
\f0\i0  ungipaqaqanka laluramkenun nunivaget tuqusighaqniluki akmaagutakun. \'91I 
\f2\i often
\f0\i0  tell the white people that we ferment the roseroot in a keg.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:90); Unangniilleq tamaana liilightuusaghllaguuq qayughllak 
\f2\i awen
\f0\i0  peleghqutkegkayuk. \'91Hunting for game had many rules and regulations, because there were 
\f2\i often 
\f0\i0 mishaps that happened.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:130)	often	intermittently								frequently			usually; often; intermittently; frequently	dctulf. gjcnjzyyj. rf;lsq hfp	from Chukchi awen \'91actual, regular\'92		CK V & E 125 (Russ vocab)		awen	awen	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \
awenkullaq	f1syrek]z2	thing that has been used or kept for quite a while															thing that has been used or kept for quite a while		< awen-?				awenkullaq	awenkullaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
awenralae	f1syhfkfs	relative (kin)		kaaskuma awenralemninnaaaghtunga  \'91when I arrive I\'92ll stay with my relatives\'92	clan member (fellow ~)												relative (kin); fellow clan member		from Chukchi aw0nral\'920n \'91owner, proprietor, master, boss\'92	14	deR. 349; A&W 16		awenralae	awenralae	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \u1088 \u1072 \u1083 \u1072 \u1099 \
awergha	f1sh4f	pelt, valuable		
\f2\i other than the usual red fox; Awergha
\f0\i0  allaghhiinaq yugem tukfighaa. \'91The man is buying all kinds of 
\f2\i fur(s)
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 40); Nunivak 
\f2\i awerghatuuq
\f0\i0 . Qatelghiituuq, kaviipigtuuq, qenghaghtulguuq, amiklugtuuq, sikigtuuq. \'91The tundra has lots of 
\f2\i furbearers
\f0\i0 . It has lots of white foxes, red foxes, blue foxes, weasels, and squirrels.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 73)	furbearer												valuable pelt; furbearer		from Chukchi awir\'920n \'91clothes, furs\'92				awergha	awergha	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1099 \u1088 \u1271 \u1072 \

\f1\b awi-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub f1b-\super \'99			
\f2\i \nosupersub root;
\f0\i0  > awillaghate-, awinqute-, awiqe-, awite-, awiyute-															PY a!\super w\nosupersub it0-				awi-2	awi-2	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1080 -\super 2\

\f1\b \nosupersub awi\super 1\nosupersub , awii	
\f0\b0 f1b\super \'a1\nosupersub . f17	is that so		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0  awi kaasimaa? \'91she got here, didn\'92t she?\'92; awi kaasimaa! \'91oh, so she got here!\'92; 
\f2\i Awi
\f0\i0  whangkutestun akuzing\'92gannikemken pikayuguziin. Whangkutestun 
\f2\i awi
\f0\i0  ayuqsiin? \'91
\f2\i Oh
\f0\i0 , you could speak like us? I thought you were never able to do so. 
\f2\i I didn\'92t know 
\f0\i0 you were like us.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:3)	now I see or realize												is that so; now I see; now I realize		from Chukchi ewi \'91so that\'92s how it is\'92				awi1, awi	awi1, awx	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1080 1, \u1072 \u1265 \u1251 \
awiim	f17v	probably		
\f2\i particle; also 
\f0\i0 awiiman													probably		from Chuk avet0vaq (?)				awim	awxm	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1251 \u1084 \
awiinawi	f17yf1b	so it's true		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 true (so it\'92s ~)												so it's true		from Chukchi ewi \'91so that\'92s how it is\'92 and ?				awinawi	awxnawi	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1265 \u1080 \
awillaghate-	f1bk]z46ns-	leave the area together		awillaghatut \'91they all left the area together\'92													to leave the area together		< awi\super 2\nosupersub -?-laghate-				awillaghate-	awillaghate-	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
awilleq	f1bk]s2	probably		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 probably		from Chukchi avet0vaq (?)				awilleq	awilleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
awilleqa	f1fk]s2f	so that\'92s how it is!		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0  
\f2\i Awilleqa
\f0\i0  ellngingumalghiit sivumnnelnguut! \'91
\f2\i So
\f0\i0 , that was them in front of us!\'92 (SLI JR. DICT 40)													so that\'92s how it is!		< awi=lleqa		SLI JR. DICT 40		awilleqa	awilleqa	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \
awinqute-	f1by2ens-	make room for something		awinqutuq \'91he make room, reduced the burden\'92; awinqutaa \'91he made room by removing it\'92 / yuuk tagiyan awinqutuq \'91because the man came he made room\'92; qamiyek usitunaqngayek saghyani awinqutii \'91when the sled was going to have too much of a load he removed his stuff\'92; angayuqami qepghaghyaghqaan ilangi awinqunnaqneghmeng kayusiitaqii sayaghqiitneng \'91to reduce his parents\'92 work he helped them with some of it\'92; usitupigtusi waran whanga awinqunnaqunga \'91you all have too heavy a load so I\'92m going to get off\'92	room (make ~ for something)	burden (reduce the ~ on something)							check, though it sounds okay; explained as ilakellillghii, iqitqullghii, which VK translates as \'91to move on to make space, sespecially where there is a crowd\'92	reduce the burden on something			to make room for something; to reduce the burden on something		< awi\super 2\nosupersub -?-		A&W 16		awinqute-	awinqute-	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1080 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
awiqe-	f1b2s-	take out of the way		Mallungunga ayveghmeng 
\f2\i awiqutkamun
\f0\i0  qagim. \'91I found a dead walrus that had been 
\f2\i uncovered
\f0\i0  by the waves.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 40)	out of the way (take ~)	remove											to take out of the way; to remove		< awi\super 2\nosupersub -?-				awiqe-	awiqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
awisu	f1bc/	king salmon			salmon, king 	
\f2\i Oncorhynchus tschawytscha											
\f0\i0 king salmon (Oncorhynchus tschawytscha)		from Chukchi ewec \'91kind of fish\'92				awisu	awisu	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1080 \u1089 \u1102 \
awite-	f1bns-	out of the way (get or take ~)		awituq \'91he got out of the way\'92; awitaa \'91he got it out of the way, he removed it\'92 / awillaghaatut \'91they all left the area\'92	get out of the way	take out of the way								remove			to get out of the way; to take out of the way; to remove		< awi\super 2\nosupersub -?-				awite-	awite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
awituwaq	f1bne1f2	probably		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 aghnequn whaa kenghet qaamyaghqaniiqiit -- kii, awilleqa whaa aqlaghaghhnaqelghiikut \'91they say the electricity is supposed to go off later on today -- oh, so it will be cold in here then\'92; Sangamek kaamgegken aghipatak? 
\f2\i Awituwaq
\f0\i0  yugneng allaneng ugiighaquten! \'91Why are your boots wet? 
\f2\i Maybe
\f0\i0  you\'92re having an affair with another man!\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 9)													probably		from Chukchi avet0vaq				awituwaq	awituwaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
awnepa	f1ysgf	probably		
\f2\i particle; especially in reference to something one wishes were not so; 
\f0\i0 =  agnepa	maybe	must be											probably; maybe; must be		from Chukchi ewn0pe \'91probably\'92				awnepa	awnepa	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \
awnisghwa	f1ybc51f	seal, large female ring		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	Phoca hispada 
\f0\i0 (ring seal) large female												large female ring seal 
\f2\i (Phoca hispada)		
\f0\i0 from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 108		awnisghwa	awnisghwa	\uc0\u1072 \u1265 \u1085 \u1080 \u1089 \u1203 \u1265 \u1072 \
ay	fq	what did you say?		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  = hay	huh?												what did you say?; huh?                 		PE ay				ay	ay	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \
aya-	fz-	go far		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 far (go ~)												to go far				CK Rub 121		aya-	aya-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 -\
ayaa-	f9-	blind (become ~)		ayaaguq \'91he went blind\'92 / ayaamaaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ayaangaaq \'91he is blind, has become blind\'92; iyem aqnighneghan ayaastaa \'91eye disease made him blind\'92													to become blind		PE aya(C)u-				aya-	ayx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u772 -\
ayaagte-	f9[ns-	difficulty (have ~ going against the wind)		ayaagtuq \'91he went against the wind\'92; aagken aygughyaghaq ayaaggnapigtuq \'91going against the strong wind from that direction is difficult\'92; ayaagtem aygumun sukangilliqukut \'91on account of the diffuculty in traveling north against the wind we suffered from going slowly\'92	go against wind with difficulty								check esp. the example (given with ayaagnapigtuq, but corrected (?) as here); explained as anuqmi aygumun askniqelghii, which VK translates as \'91having a hard time trying to walk against a strong wind\'92; is it just walking?				to have difficulty going against the wind; to go against the wind with difficulty				A&W 16		ayagte-	ayxgte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ayaawaq	f91f2	blubber used in stove to make the firewood burn better and hotter		nangzeghaghmeng ayaawighpaglukek egllugni kumaghsaqminikek puqlaghqwaagaa \'91she put quite a bit of blubber in her stove when she lit it so it got quite warm\'92; eglluk uqumeng ayaawighaak quuget kumaragkiighesqelluki \'91she put some blubber in the stove so that the firewood could burn better\'92									check; explained as: mesiighet sangwaat uqut kumaneghtuqaq egllumun iknaqughtisit, which VK translates just as above				blubber used in stove to make the firewood burn better and hotter				A&W 16		ayawaq	ayxwaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayag-	fzu-	push off		ayagtuq \'91he pushed himself away\'92; ayagaa \'91he pushed her or it away\'92 / Amik 
\f2\i ayagluku
\f0\i0  uumgaqa. \'91I closed the door by 
\f2\i pushing
\f0\i0  it.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 41)	push away	reject								dislike			to push off; to push away; to reject; to dislike		PE aya!-			 > ayagaghte-, ayagleghaq, ayagmigaq, ayagun, ayakite-, ayakmitagh-, ayakutaq, ayapegh-, ayaqighte-, ayaviiq	ayag-	ayag-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1075 -\
ayagagh-	fzuf4-	train to develop strength		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 lift weights												to train to develop strength; to lift weights				CK Rub 120		ayagagh-	ayagagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ayagaghte-	fzuf5ns-	push off suddenly		ayagaghtuq \'91he pushed off\'92; ayagaghtaa \'91he pushed it away\'92/ yuggaq angyamelnguq sikumeng ayagaghtuq \'91the man in the boat pushed away from the ice\'92													to suddenly push off		< ayag-aghte-				ayagaghte-	ayagaghte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ayagaq	fzuf2	weight		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E);
\f0\i0  ayagaasiq \'91mittens or gloves used to lift weights\'92	barbell	rock for exercising											weight; barbell; rock for exercising	dtc; infyuf	< ayag-?		CK V & E 99; Rub 120		ayagaq	ayagaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayagleghaq	fzuks4f2	tiller for boat															tiller for boat		< ayag-?-				ayagleghaq	ayagleghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayagmigaq	fzuvbuf2	helm of boat															helm of boat		< ayag-mik-ghaq				ayagmigaq	ayagmigaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayagsi-	fz[cb-	position (get into ~ with the harpoon for striking)		ayagsiiq \'91he got into position with the harpoon for striking\'92 / sivuyagtengat ayagsighllaguuq \'91their striker (at the bow) is positioning the harpoon for the strike\'92	aim harpoon at whale								check, but sounds okay; explained as: yataaghqelghii sanqutet naghullgunnaluki, which VK translates as \'91positioning the harpoon to strike\'92				to get into position with the harpoon for striking; to aim harpoon at whale		< ayak-?-		A&W 16		ayagsi-	ayagsi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 -\
ayagsigh-	fz[cb4-	prop up		amik pekuutameng ayagsighaa \'91he propped (open) the door with a shovel\'92; angyaq iggaggluku angwaaghutmeng ayagsiitkelluteng ayagsighaat \'91they propped up the boat leaning it against a paddle which they used as a support\'92; niillghek ayagsightughlukek aghnaq kiightiiq \'91after propping up the stretching frame the woman is splitting (a walrus hide)\'92; ayagsiin \'91something used as a prop or support\'92	support								check; explained as: uullghiitaq, ayagusiq unaghsiq, which VK translates as \'91a large wood that is used as a leanto to keep something from falling over\'92, but which probably means: \'91device to prevent collapsing, a prop of wood\'92; given that ayagsiin (built on ayagsigh-) is a word for \'91prop\'92, is *ayagta (from which ayagsigh- it built) also a word for \'91prop\'92 (as in CAY)?				to prop up; to support		< ayag-(s)ta-ligh-		A&W 16		ayagsigh-	ayagsigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ayagun	fzuey	helm of boat			wick adjuster for seal oil lamp	whale harpoon without explosives								pole for skin tent or of the traditional dome-shaped house			push pole; wick adjuster for seal oil lamp; whale harpoon without explosives; pole for skin tent; internal pole of the traditional dome-shaped house		PE aya!un  (under PE aya!-); < ayag-(u)n				ayagun	ayagun	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
ayagusiitaq	fzuec7nf2	seal oil-lamp, center, of the tent		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 center seal oil-lamp of the tent		< ayagun-?-(u)taq		CK Rub 120		ayagusitaq	ayagusxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayagutaq	fzuenf2	implement used to push boat away from ice or ice away from the boat		kangqwaaghmi uunghameng ayagutaqluta angwaaghutmengllu alpagtukut \'91we passed through amid the small pieces of ice floating on the sea using as pushers harpoons and paddles\'92; angyalek qatmigmeng ayagutaqluni angyaq ayagaa \'91the captain pushed the boat off using a staff as a pushing device\'92	support, permanent, in a tent								check, but looks okay 				implement used to push boat away from ice or ice away from the boat; permanent support in a tent		PE aya!un  (under PE aya!-); < ayag-(u)taq		A&W 17; Rub 120		ayagutaq	ayagutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayagyu	fzum/	tent (temporary skin or canvas ~ hung up inside a dwelling as a sleeping area to increase warmth at night)															temporary skin or canvas tent hung up inside a dwelling as a sleeping area to increase warmth at night				Yupik Lore, vol. 3, p.29		ayagyu	ayagyu	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \
ayak	fzr	harpoon shaft			spear								
\f2\i see Parts of Harpoon in Appendix				
\f0\i0 harpoon shaft; spear		PE aya!-		A&W 16	ayagsi-	ayak	ayak	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1082 \
ayakagh-	fzrf4-	singe food intentionally before eating it		ayakaghaa \'91he barbecued it\'92 / Qawaagmeng 
\f2\i ayakaghluku
\f0\i0  neghtukut. \'91We ate a bird after 
\f2\i roasting
\f0\i0  it over the fire.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 41)	barbecue	roast over a fire											to intentionally singe food before eating it; to barbecue; to roast over a fire						ayakagh-	ayakagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ayakaqayuk	fzrf2f/r	lead (metal)		
\f2\i so called from its ease in being melted	
\f0\i0 solder												lead (metal); solder		< ayakagh-kayuk				ayakaqayuk	ayakaqayuk	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \
ayakigha-	fzrb4f-	travel (by boat) by pushing off from chunks of ice or pushing ice out of the way		kangqwaaq ayakighaaqluku alpagaghput \'91we passed through it pushing off from the chunks of ice\'92; ayakighalghiit ayallghitgun igleghtukut \'91we travel through the way where they had pushed the ice away\'92									check; explained as: angyaq kangqwaaghmi sikutuqami sikut ayagaqluki igleghlleghhiit, which VK translates as \'91boats traveling by pushing chunks of ice off their path with paddle or other device\'92 -- check to see if the base is actually akigha- as given here				to travel (by boat) by pushing off from chunks of ice or pushing ice out of the way		< ayag-?-		A&W 11		ayakigha-	ayakigha-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1082 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 -\
ayakite-	fzrbns-	hit barrier suddenly		Sikukun 
\f2\i ayakilluta
\f0\i0  kimaawiikut. \'91We 
\f2\i ran into
\f0\i0  pack ice and lost time.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 41)	enounter a blast of wind												to suddenly hit barrier; to encounter a blast of wind		< ayag-?-				ayakite-	ayakite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ayakmitagh-	fzrvbnf4-	wind blows against it		anuqmi nalugnaqelghiikut ayakmitaghaakut \'91it was a little hard landing against the wind\'92	winds blow against each other												for wind to blow against it; for winds to blow against each other		< ayag-?-				ayakmitagh-	ayakmitagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1082 \u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ayakutaq	fzrenf2	cheekbone			side of face	face (side of ~)											cheekbone; side of face		PY ayakutaq (under PE aya!-)				ayakutaq	ayakutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayallaghwaaq	fzk]z4162	cutting board for use in skin sewing															cutting board for use in skin sewing		from Aleut a@ayaX and postbase -(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				ayallaghwaq	ayallaghwxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
ayallaq	fzk]z2	object or person on which shaman sits during his shamanistic activity for his flight											could be related to CAY ayagte-, or CSY ayallaghwaaq \'91cutting board\'92				object or person on which a shaman sits during his shamanistic activity for his flight				CK Rub 121		ayallaq	ayallaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
ayaniqe-	fzyb2s-	nostalgia (feel ~)															to feel nostalgia						ayaniqe-	ayaniqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ayapegh-	fzgs4-	lean on or with one's hand		ayapeghtuq \'91he leaned his hand on something\'92; ayapghaa \'91he leaned his hand on it\'92 /													to lean on or with one's hand		PE ayap03- (under PE aya!-); < ayag-?-				ayapegh-	ayapegh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 -\
ayapghaataq	fzgu56nf2	mitten		ayapghaatagka \'91my mittens\'92													mitten		< ayapegh-(u)taq				ayapghataq	ayapghxtaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1087 \u1075 \u1203 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayapghun	fzgu5ey	bone in forearm			radius	ulna											bone in forearm (either radius or ulna)		PY-S ayap3un (under PE aya!-); < ayapegh-(u)n				ayapghun	ayapghun	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1087 \u1075 \u1203 \u1091 \u1085 \
ayaqighfik	fz2b5abr	armrest															armrest		< ayaqighte-vik				ayaqighfik	ayaqighfik	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \
ayaqighte-	fz2b5ns-	lean against something		ayaqightuq \'91he leaned against something\'92; ayaqightaa \'91he leaned it against something\'92 / Unaghsit kiinghesqelluki 
\f2\i ayaqighqughanka
\f0\i0  uyghagkun. \'91I 
\f2\i leaned
\f0\i0  the lumber against a rock for drying.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 42)													to lean against something		 < ayag-?-				ayaqighte-	ayaqighte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ayaqighutaq	fz2b4enf2	backrest															backrest		< ayaqighte-(u)taq				ayaqighutaq	ayaqighutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1179 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayaviilek	fzd7ksr	daddy-long-legs type of spider			spider (daddy-long-legs type of ~)	grasshopper											daddy-long-legs type of spider; grasshopper		< ayaviiq-lek				ayavilek	ayavxlek	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1074 \u1251 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
ayaviiq	fzd72	cane			walking stick												cane; walking stick		< ayag-?				ayaviq	ayavxq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1074 \u1251 \u1179 \
ayaviiqulleq	fzd72ek]s2	clapping of a bird\'92s wings on the ground		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 clapping of a bird\'92s wings on the ground		< ayaviiq-?-lleq		CK Rub 120		ayaviqulleq	ayavxqulleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1103 \u1074 \u1251 \u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
ayeme-	fqsvs-	break relatively long thin object		ayemuq \'91it broke\'92 / ayemtaa igaasiq \'91he broke the pencil\'92; igaasiq ayemtuq \'91the pencil got broken\'92; ayemneghlluk \'91firm, strong, unbreakable thing\'92													to break relatively long thin object		PY-S ay0m0-				ayeme-	ayeme-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 -\
ayemkagh-	fqsvrf4-	break something off of (it)		ayemkaghaa \'91he broke it\'92; Savigma nuvuga ayemkaghaqa. \'91I broke the tip of my knife.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 126)													to break; to break something off of (it)		< ayeme-kagh-				ayemkagh-	ayemkagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ayemkaghaq	fqsvrf4f2	chewing gum, homemade		
\f2\i made from oil drippings collected under seal oil lamp, or by slowly cooking seal or whale oil until thick;
\f0\i0  = ayungkaghaq	gum (homemade chewing ~)												homemade chewing gum						ayemkaghaq	ayemkaghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayemqe-	fqsv2s-	break long thin object to pieces		ayemquq \'91it broke up\'92; ayemqaa \'91he broke it up\'92 / esnam tuvaa qagim ayemqaa \'91the waves broke up the shore ice\'92													to break long thin object to pieces		< ayeme-?-				ayemqe-	ayemqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ayemqugh-	fqsv2e4-	break long thin object to pieces		ayemquq \'91it broke up\'92; ayemqaa \'91he broke it up\'92 /													to break long thin object to pieces		< ayeme-qugh-				ayemqugh-	ayemqugh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
ayemqutek	fqsv2ensr	sea ice (field of jumbled pieces of wind-blown ~, weak in places, often near the shore and limiting travel and hunting)		
\f2\i see item 8 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	cake ice, broken	sea ice type											field of jumbled pieces of wind-blown sea ice, weak in places, often near the shore and limiting travel and hunting; broken cake ice		< ayemqe-(u)n-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 ayemqutek	ayemqutek	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
ayemruugte-	fqsvh8[ns-	exercise the legs by walking		ayumiq ayemruugta quunpeng atuqegkaqaat \'91long ago they always engaged in exercise-walking\'92; iiwleng ayemruugllni yugusiqegnaghtuq (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  yugunqeggnaghtuq ?) \'91regular exercise leads to bodily health\'92									check, explained as: ughumaangllaq, which VK translates as \'91strenuous walk, exercise\'92				to exercise the legs by walking				A&W 17		ayemrugte-	ayemrxgte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1088 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ayengqeghraq	fqs32s4hf2	snare for catching cormorants															snare for catching cormorants						ayengqeghraq	ayengqeghraq	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayepsugigh-	fqsgc/ub4-	securely (do something (e.g. fasten something) ~)		asightekaghten ayepsugighluki pinaketen \'91do that which you\'92ve lashed together securely\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ayepsugite-									check, but looks okay, explained as: ayugi, which VK translates as \'91securely\'92 -- note just as there is ayepsugite- & ayepsugigh-, there are also ayugite- & ayugigh-				to do something (e.g. fasten something) securely				A&W 17		ayepsugigh-	ayepsugigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ayepsugite-	fqsgc/ubns-	sturdy (be ~)		ayepsugituq \'91it is sturdy\'92 / ayepsugilngughmeng qamislimaanga \'91I made a sled from sturdy material\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ayepsugigh-													to be sturdy				A&W 17		ayepsugite-	ayepsugite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ayghigh-	fq4b4-	accustomed to something (be ~)		ayghightuq \'91he is accustomed to something\'92 / ayghiitkaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ayghiitaa \'91he is accustomed to it or to her\'92; ayghiqaq \'91something or someone that has become set in a certain way\'92; 
\f2\i Ayghiitaqa
\f0\i0  maani kiyaghtelleq. \'91I 
\f2\i got used to
\f0\i0  living here.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 42); saaqwlimta qikmighaat ayghightuq whavek neghqenneghmeng \'91our neighbor\'92s puppy got used to coming here since we feed it\'92; tumet iqragngaghmeng ayghightut kumlanghem ughullgha maliglluku \'91the roads became crooked following the melting of the permafrost\'92; kii, weekend-enneghatni ayghiitkaa Nome-meng \'91gee, he got in the habit of going to Nome every weekend\'92	set (become ~ a certain way)												to be accustomed to something; to become set a certain way						ayghigh-	ayghigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ayghuugh-	fq484-	replace broken parts		ayghuughaa \'91he refurbished it\'92 / qamiyegka ayemquqak ayghuughlukek atughlleqagka \'91I will use my sled after replacing the broken parts\'92; ayghuuqaghlutek ullghitak salin pinightuk \'91the snow machine is fine still, having had its broken parts replaced\'92	refurbish	repair							check; explained as: naavegkam nalighneghi simighaqluki alla atuughtekat, which VK glosses as \'91to replace a broken part of something and is in use again\'92 (?)				to replace broken parts; to refurbish; to repair				A&W 17		ayghugh-	ayghxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1271 \u1263 \u1271 -\

\f1\b aygugh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fque4-\super \'a1	\nosupersub travel against the wind		aygughtuq \'91he is going against the wind\'92 / ayguneghlliqaquq \'91he is having a hard time going into a headwind\'92; Anuqa 
\f2\i aygughnapigtuq
\f0\i0  unaaq. \'91The(strong) wind made 
\f2\i walking against it
\f0\i0  hard this morning.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 42)	headwind (travel into ~)												to travel against the wind or into headwind		PE a9!u3- \'91go against current or wind\'92				aygugh-1	aygugh-1	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub aygugh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub fque4-\super \'99	\nosupersub north (go ~)		aygughtuq \'91he is going north\'92 / \'91Sikumeng taanegken ima 
\f2\i ayguqaagukut
\f0\i0 . \'91We have been 
\f2\i traveling north
\f0\i0  all the way from the ice out there.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 42); 
\f2\i see also 
\f0\i0 ayguq	go north												to go north					> aygughike-, aygughitiqe-, aygughara, aygughniite-; 	aygugh-2	aygugh-2	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub aygughara	fque4fhf	flock of birds heading north in the morning															flock of birds heading north in the morning		< aygugh\super 2\nosupersub -?-				aygughara	aygughara	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \
aygughike-	fque4brs-	doubt		aygughikaa \'91he doubts it\'92 /													to doubt		 < aygugh-?-				aygughike-	aygughike-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
aygughitiqe-	fque4bnb2s-	doubt (be in ~ about something)		aygughitiquq \'91he is in doubt\'92 /													to be in doubt about something		< aygugh\super 1\nosupersub -?-				aygughitiqe-	aygughitiqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
aygughniite-	fque4y7ns-	sea ice conditions make travel difficult		
\f2\i in particular for tlate fall or early winter sea ice to consist of ice chunks and freezing slush blown against shore or a larger field of ice, making travel difficult													
\f0\i0 for there to be sea ice conditions making travel difficult 		< aygugh\super 2\nosupersub -niite- or < aygugh\super 1\nosupersub -niite-				aygughnite-	aygughnxte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
aygughnin	fque4yby	ice blown into a cake by wind against a southern shore		
\f2\i see item 9 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												ice blown into a cake by wind against a southern shore		< ayghugh\super 2\nosupersub -neq\super 2\nosupersub -i\super 2\nosupersub -(u)n				aygughnin	aygughnin	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1085 \
ayguq	fque2	north		ayguqliq \'91the one furthest north\'92; 
\f2\i see also 
\f0\i0 aygugh-\super 2													\nosupersub north		from or related to Chukchi ey!0cq0n \'91north\'92 ?				ayguq	ayguq	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \
aymaakae	fqv6rfs	carcass		unangsaghaqngameng aymaakelaghluki uniquumiit neqesgaghqaaluki \'91when they caught quite a few seals they kept some of the carcasses behind for trap bait\'92; aymaaka neghqutkaaluku tagitaqa \'91I brought the carcass for dog food\'92; aymaaka tagitkaqa nengighqaqa \'91I divided and distributed the carcass I brought back\'92; Suflugaqa 
\f2\i aymaakengllaghaqa
\f0\i0  nutaghameng. \'91I made a new 
\f2\i stock
\f0\i0  for my gun.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 43)	gunstock								check, somehow I (SAJ) think of this as a limbless carcass -- check the first example here from A&W				carcass; gunstock		from Chukchi aymak, pl. aymak0t \'91carcass of killed animal\'92	14	A&W 17		aymakae	aymxkae	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1084 \u257 \u1082 \u1072 \u1099 \
aymalqae	fqvfk]2fs	humerus			femur												humerus; femur		from Chukchi aymalq0l \'91femoral bone\'92	10. 14			aymalqae	aymalqae	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1099 \
Aymaramket	Fqvfhfvrsn	clan (a particular ~) 		
\f2\i originally from Chukotka;
\f0\i0  = Armaramket; 
\f2\i singular is 
\f0\i0 Aymaramka													a particular clan		from Chukchi arma!t0 \'91strong\'92 and remk0n \'91people\'92	14 ?			Aymaramket	Aymaramket	\uc0\u1040 \u1253 \u1084 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \
ayngalqiwa	fq3fk]2b1f	net made from reindeer sinew used to entrap fur-bearing animals		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 net made from reindeer sinew used to entrap fur-bearing animals		from Chukchi (perhaps from, or related to, ey&ek \'91animal cry\'92)		CK Rub 37		ayngalqiwa	ayngalqiwa	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1265 \u1072 \
ayngananga	fq3fyf3f	musical instrument		
\f2\i also used in the dual 
\f0\i0 aynganangak 
\f2\i for one instrument	
\f0\i0 piano	phonograph											musical instrument; piano; phonograph		from Chukchi \'91ey&ene&, pl. \'91ey&ene&et \'91musical instrument\'92				ayngananga	ayngananga	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \
ayngananga-	fq3fyf3f-	musical instrument (play a ~)		Panika Santiyami 
\f2\i aynganangastenguuq. \'91
\f0\i0 My daughter is the one who 
\f2\i plays piano
\f0\i0  Sundays.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 43)	play a musical instrument												to play a musical instrument						ayngananga-	ayngananga-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 -\
aynganghineq	fq3fy4bys2	trap used for mountain sheep		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 trap used for mountain sheep		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 37		aynganghineq	aynganghineq	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
ayngelin	fq3skby	wall of ice formed along shore or shorefast ice 		
\f2\i unsafe to pass through; may be used in the plural: 
\f0\i0 ayngalitet; 
\f2\i see item 10 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type								In Rub it\'92s ayngalin				wall of ice formed along shore or shorefast ice						ayngelin	ayngelin	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \
ayngughaq	fq3e4f2	rock (type of volcanic ~ that floats)															type of volcanic rock that floats				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 142		ayngughaq	ayngughaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayngusi-	fq3ecb-	make chewing gum by cooking seal oil until very gummy		
\f2\i apparently the gummy oil is mixed with pussy willow catkins (?)
\f0\i0 ; ayngusiiq \'91he is making gum\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 ayungkaghaq	chewing gum (make ~ by cooking seal oil until very gummy)	gum (make chewing ~ by cooking seal oil until very gummy)											to make chewing gum by cooking seal oil until very gummy		PE ay&un				ayngusi-	ayngusi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 -\
ayngusiq	fq3ecb2	pussy willow used in making chewing gum		
\f2\i apparently mixed with the cooked seal oil (?)													
\f0\i0 pussy willow used in making chewing gum				CK Walunga 56		ayngusiq	ayngusiq	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
aynguusik	fq38cbr	overalls made from seal skin 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used while butchering whales in water													
\f0\i0 overalls made from seal skin		< ?-(u)siq-
\f2\i dual		
\f0\i0 CK Rub 37		ayngusik	ayngxsik	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \
ayu-	f/-	progress		ayuuq \'91it continued\'92 /	continue	keep on going											to progress; to continue; to keep on going		PE ayu-			ayuste-	ayu-	ayu-	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 -\
ayughaayak	f/46zr	herd of bull walrus on ice north of Gambell		ayughaayak uglaq esghaamayaqangat enraq sikughllaguftuq uplegvikelleghqameng \'91they saw a herd of bull walrus but there was too much ice around to go after them\'92; Tawani Pinaghvigmillu 
\f2\i ayughaayak
\f0\i0  qawani piiqaat nani taakwani Tapghum ketanganillu. \'91In the month of June they would hunt 
\f2\i bull walrus
\f0\i0  at their feeding grounds out from Tapghuq.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:136)	walrus (herd of bull ~ on ice north of Gambell)												herd of bull walrus on ice north of Gambell				VK		ayughayak	ayughxyak	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1271 \u257 \u1103 \u1082 \
ayugigh-	f/ub4-	tighten		ayugighaa \'91he tightened it\'92 / Angyaghput tengnnayukagu 
\f2\i ayugighluku
\f0\i0  asightaqa. \'91I 
\f2\i securely tied 
\f0\i0 our boat so that it wouldn\'92t be blown away by the wind.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 43); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 ayugite-	fasten more securely												to tighten (screws and the like); to fasten more securely		PY-S ayu!-				ayugigh-	ayugigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ayugite-	f/ubns-	durable (be ~)		ayugituq \'91it is durable\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 ayugigh-	sturdy (be ~)												to be durable; to be sturdy		PY-S ayu!-				ayugite-	ayugite-	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ayullaghqe-	f/k]z52s-	heal (not ~ due to further aggrevation)		
\f2\i of a person or a wound; 
\f0\i0 ayullaghqegkaq aga aghviisimaat \'91they took the one who didn\'92t heal across there (to the doctor or hospital)\'92									check; explained as: kiit, aqnightellghet maamlaaghtestegpenaki aqayamawistaatam wata naafqegkii, which VK translates as \'91wounds and cuts that become worse from hurting them before they completely heal\'92				to not heal due to further aggrevation 				A&W 17		ayullaghqe-	ayullaghqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ayumightaq	f/vb5nf2	thing of long ago		
\f2\i Ayumightameng
\f0\i0  ungipameng nagasugaqunga. \'91I love to listen to the stories 
\f2\i of long ago
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 43)	long ago (thing of ~)	ago (thing of long ~)											thing of long ago	lfdybq. cnfhbyysq. lhtdybq	< ayumiq-taq\super 2				\nosupersub ayumightaq	ayumightaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayumiineq	f/v7ys2	narrator of folktales		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 storyteller								check				folktale narrator; storyteller	crfpbntkm	< ayumiq-?-neq		Rub. 119		ayumineq	ayumxneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1084 \u1251 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
ayumiinneghaqu	f/v7y]s4f2e	yearly		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 end of the year (by the ~)								check this				yearly; by end of the year		< ayumiq-?-
\f2\i contemporative				
\f0\i0 ayuminneghaqu	ayumxnneghaqu	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1084 \u1251 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \
ayumiq*	f/vb2	long ago 		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ayu-	year	ago (long ago)											long ago; year	lfdyj. d cnfhbye. ght;lt			CK V & E 125  (Russ vocab)	> ayumightaq, ayumiinneghaqu, ayumiqulleq, ayumiqun, ayumiquyagu	ayumiq*	ayumiq*	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \
ayumiqulleq	f/vb2ek]s2	year		
\f2\i Ayumiqulleq
\f0\i0  tallima atughaghput tagitemnneng. \'91We have been here five 
\f2\i years
\f0\i0  since we moved back.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 43)													year		< ayumiq-?-lleq				ayumiqulleq	ayumiqulleq	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
ayumiqun	f/vb2ey	next year		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 year (next ~)												next year	yf ,eleobq ujl	< ayumiq-
\f2\i vialis		
\f0\i0 CK V & E 125 (Russ vocab)		ayumiqun	ayumiqun	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
ayumiquyagu	f/vb2ezue	next year		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 year (the following ~)												next year; the following year		< ayumiq-?-
\f2\i consequential				
\f0\i0 ayumiquyagu	ayumiquyagu	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \
ayungkaghaq	f/3rf4f2	chewing gum, homemade		
\f2\i made from oil drippings collected under seal oil lamp, or by slowly cooking seal or whale oil until thick; cf.
\f0\i0  ayemkaghaq	gum (homemade chewing ~)												homemade chewing gum 						ayungkaghaq	ayungkaghaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1187 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ayuqe-	f/2s-	be a certain way		tawaten ayuquq \'91it is like that\'92; ayuqaa \'91it is like it\'92 / ayuqut \'91they are alike\'92	resemble	like (be ~)								alike (be ~)			to be a certain way; to resemble; to be like 		PE ayuq0-			> ayuqeisghagh-, Ayuqliq	ayuqe-	ayuqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ayuqesighagh-	f/2scb4f4-	mimic		ayuqesighaghtuq \'91he is mimicking someone\'92; ayuqesighaghaa \'91he is mimicking her\'92 /													to mimic		< ayuqe-sigh-?-				ayuqesighagh-	ayuqesighagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ayuqlightaq	f/2k]b5nf2	boat, large, used by mainland Alaskan Eskimos		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 large boat used by mainland Alaskan Eskimos	,jkifz ,fqlfhf (c fvthbrfycrjuj ,thtuf)	< ayuqliq-taq\super 2		\nosupersub CK V & E 106; 119		ayuqlightaq	ayuqlightaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Ayuqliq*	F/2k]b2	mainland Alaskan Eskimo			Alaskan Eskimo, mainlander	Eskimo, mainland Alaskan											mainland Alaskan Eskimo		< ayuqe-liq				Ayuqliq*	Ayuqliq*	\uc0\u1040 \u1102 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
ayuste-	f/cns-	go or cause to go very far		ayustuq \'91it went far\'92; ayustaa \'91he made it go far\'92 / miluutkani ayustaa \'91he made the thing he threw go very far\'92; angyaghhaat taaga ayustut \'91the boat out there went way far out\'92; qepghaqani ayustaa \'91he made his job last a long time\'92; kite-ni elngaatall quulmun ayustaa \'91he let his kite go way up\'92									check; explained as uyavaghalghii nalighmeng uyavaghasleghhii, which VK translates as \'91having to go far or forcing something to go far\'92; what is the postbase -ste- here? (\'91cause\'92 in the first example, but what about in the second\'92)				to go or cause to go very far		< ayu-(te)ste- (?)		A&W 18		ayuste-	ayuste-	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ayuutqe-	f0n2s-	ago (have happened a quite while ago)		qikmighaq tuuftekaq qivghukluku unguvangnaqsaghluku siinenllu ayuutqumalghii \'91feeling bad over the puppy that choked he tried to revive it but it (the choking) had happened quite a while ago\'92	far (have gone too ~)								check; explained as: neghipiglluni sakakaq agarugllagughtekaq, which VK translates as \'91happened quite a while ago\'92 -- what is agaru.... ?, and sakakaq 				to have happened quite a while ago; to have gone too far		< ayu-?-		A&W 18		ayutqe-	ayxtqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ayva-	fqdf-	ill (be ~)		ayvaaq \'91he is ill /													to be ill						ayva-	ayva-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 -\
ayvamiqe-	fqdfvb2s-	exhausted (become ~ from over-exertion)		ayvamiquq \'91he got exhausted\'92 / kilgaaquluni ayvamiquq \'91he ran a long distance and became exhausted\'92	run down (feel ~)												to become exhausted from over-exertion; to be feel run down		< ayva-?-				ayvamiqe-	ayvamiqe-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ayvasaa-	fqdfc9-	ill (feel ~)		ayvasaaguq \'91he feels ill\'92 / qiighwqallghan ayvasaastaa \'91catching cold made him feel ill\'92									Rub. has nz;tkj hfybnm (to wound badly) -- check				to feel ill		< ayva-?-				ayvasa-	ayvasx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 -\
ayveghagh-	fqds4f4-	catch walrus			walrus (catch ~)												to catch walrus		< ayveq-agh-				ayveghagh-	ayveghagh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Ayveghyaget 	Fqds4mzusn	Gambell (old village site on the east side of present-day ~)		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices; plural; literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91many walrus\'92; 
\f2\i note that 
\f0\i0 \'93Asveryagmiut\'94 (
\f2\i i.e.,
\f0\i0   Azveghyagmiut) 
\f2\i is the Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik word for St. Lawrence Islanders													
\f0\i0 old village site on the east side of present-day Gambell		< ayveq-yaga\super e\nosupersub -
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Ayveghyaget 	Ayveghyaget 	\uc0\u1040 \u1253 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \
ayveliigh-	fqdsk74-	cook walrus			walrus (cook ~)												to cook walrus		< ayveq-liigh-				ayveligh-	ayvelxgh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
ayveq	fqds2	walrus			
\f2\i Obodenus divergens												
\f0\i0 walrus
\f2\i  (Obodenus divergens)		
\f0\i0 PE ayv03			> ayveghagh-, Ayveghyaget, ayveliigh-, ayvii-	ayveq	ayveq	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \

\f1\b Ayvigteq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Fqdb[ns2\super \'a1	\nosupersub Aivichtik River on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Camp Iveetok at the mouth of the Aivichtik River on St. Lawrence Is.												Aivichtik River and Camp Iveetok at its mouth on St. Lawrence Is.						Ayvigteq1	Ayvigteq1	\uc0\u1040 \u1253 \u1074 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 1\

\f1\b Ayvigteq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Fqdb[ns2\super \'99	\nosupersub Gambell (site on the coast east of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on the coast east of Gambell						Ayvigteq2	Ayvigteq2	\uc0\u1040 \u1253 \u1074 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 2\
ayvii-	fqd7-	butcher walrus on ice			walrus (butcher ~ on ice)												to butcher walrus on the ice		< ayveq-?-				ayvi-	ayvx-	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1251 -\
Ayvikaan	Fqdbr6y	Ivekan Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Ivekan Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.						Ayvikan	Ayvikxn	\uc0\u1040 \u1253 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u257 \u1085 \
ayviquma	fqdb2evf	walrus, female, with calf or calves															female walrus with calf or calves		< ayveq-?-		CK Rub 35; SLI Cur. Man. 59		ayviquma	ayviquma	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \
aywaa	fq16	north or north side		
\f2\i when inflecting, this word acts as the 3s-s possessed form of
\f0\i0  ayguq 'north' 
\f2\i (q.v.), thus with non-absolutive endings in
\f0\i0  n (
\f2\i rather than
\f0\i0  m):  aywaaneng \'91from the north\'92 (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , 'from its north'); 
\f2\i Aywaanun
\f0\i0  tevyaghtunemni uteghtaqlunga. Aga 
\f2\i aywaan
\f0\i0  esnenga aliinemkun uteghtaqunga tesamavek. 'Upon reaching the 
\f2\i north side (
\f0\i0 of it) I'd turn back. When the shore of the (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , its)
\f2\i  north side
\f0\i0  became visible to me I would return down south.' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:176); 
\f2\i Aywaa
\f0\i0  aanguq. 
\f2\i Aywaani
\f0\i0  nunam aatgha Chukotka. \'91
\f2\i The north 
\f0\i0 is large. In 
\f2\i the north
\f0\i0  the name of the land is Chukotka.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 12); 
\f2\i however
\f0\i0  aywaa 
\f2\i can also behave as a complete base in its own right: 
\f0\i0 aywaa(gh)pik 'exactly north'; aywaaghmiit 'dwellers of the north'; (
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  kellii, kilgaa, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  uughqa)													north; north side; the north		< ayguq-
\f2\i possessed ending				
\f0\i0 aywa	aywx	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \
aywaapik	fq16gbr	north															north		< aywaa-pik				aywapik	aywxpik	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
aywaaraawa	fq16h61f	parietal bone of reindeer with antlers removed so that brain can be eaten															reindeer parietal bone with antlers removed so that brain can be eaten 		from Chukchi aywar\'92awa (?)		CK Rub 36		aywarawa	aywxrxwa	\uc0\u1072 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \u1088 \u257 \u1265 \u1072 \
azi-	fpb-	abundance (have an ~ of food and the like)		upenghami aziluta neqmeng lliighaqukut \'91we have an abundance of food in the springtime\'92	get whatever one wants (be able to ~)												to have an abundance of food and the like; to be able to get whatever one wants		PY ayi-		VK		azi-	azi-	\uc0\u1072 \u1079 \u1080 -\
azigughte-	fpbue5ns-	warm up (begin to ~ (of area, room, house, etc. with a source of heat)															to begin to warm up (of area, room, house, etc. with a source of heat)						azigughte-	azigughte-	\uc0\u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
azigutaq	fpbuenf2	shelter of rocks, snow, etc.		Anigumeng ikulunga 
\f2\i azigutangllaghtunga
\f0\i0 . \'91I cut some snow blocks and made a 
\f2\i shelter
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI. JR. DICT. 44)	shield												shelter of rocks, snow, etc.; shield					> azigutigh-	azigutaq	azigutaq	\uc0\u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
azigutigh-	fpbuenb4-	take shelter			shelter (take ~)	provide with shelter								shelter (provide with shelter)			to take shelter; to provide with shelter		< azigutaq-ligh-				azigutigh-	azigutigh-	\uc0\u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\
eflegh- 	sak]s4-	uncomfortable		
\f2\i emotional root; 
\f0\i0 efleghyugtuq \'91he feels discomfort from wetness or stickiness on his skin or from poorly fitting clothing or other discomfort on his skin\'92; efleghyukaa \'91he feels discomfort from it\'92; efleghnaghtuq \'91it causes discomfort\'92; efleghnaq \'91something that causes discomfort\'92; efleqetaq \'91person who tends to easily feels discomfort from wetness or the like\'92													uncomfortable from wetness, stickiness, poorly fitting clothing, etc.		PE 0pl03-				eflegh- 	eflegh- 	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 -\
efleghte-	sak]s5ns-	drive away (
\f2\i especially
\f0\i0  animals)		efleghtaa \'91it caused it to move away\'92 / angyat ayveghllagmun qungangiilluteng pegnem elfeghsimakangat \'91a boat came into the midst of a herd of walrus and with effort got it to finally move on\'92; igleghteghllagem saamllu tepem teghik qantaghanlenguq ukani efleghtaa \'91the constant motion and the odor drove away the wildlife that was nearby\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  eflegh-, eflequgh-									check; explaned as: saam qinuyugtem nemineng iqilghii, which VK glosses as \'91when something, especially wild animal leave their habitat because of interference\'92 (should it be iqillghii ?) -- how is this related to the emotional root eflegh- ??				to drive away (
\f2\i especially
\f0\i0  animals)				A&W 19		efleghte-	efleghte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
eflequgh-	sak]s2e4-	tell forcefully to leave		eflequghaa \'91he expelled her\'92 / eflequghiiq \'91he expelled someone\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 efleghte-	expel												to tell forcefully to leave; to expel						eflequgh-	eflequgh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\

\f1\b efluga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub sak]/uf\super s\nosupersub .	floor		= eflugaq													floor		from English \'91floor\'92	SLI			eflugae	eflugae	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1099 ,\
eflugaq	sak]/uf2	floor		= efluga\super e													\nosupersub floor		from English \'91floor\'92	SLI			eflugaq	eflugaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
eflugh- 	sak]/4-	run one's hand or fingers over (it)		eflughaa \'91he ran his hand over it\'92 / eflughiiq \'91he ran his hand over something\'92; = uflugh-													to run one's hand or fingers over (it)					> eflughaagh-	eflugh- 	eflugh- 	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
eflughaagh-	sak]/464-	run one's hand over (it) repeatedly			feel												to repeatedly run one's hand over (it); to feel		< eflugh-?		CK V& E 147 (feel)		eflughagh-	eflughxgh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 -\
efqugh-	sa2e4-	pleased		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0   efqughyugtuq \'91he is pleased with things, satisfied\'92; efqughyukaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  efquqaa \'91he is pleased with it\'92; efqughnaghtuq \'91it is satisfying\'92	satisfied												pleased; satisfied						efqugh-	efqugh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
efqughute-	sa2e4ens-	do the right, appropriate or pleasing thing		efqughutuq \'91he did the right thing for the situation\'92; efqughutaa \'91he did the right thing for it\'92 / efqughutegpenani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  efqughutegpaan \'91(he) not doing the right thing\'92; elngaatall efqughutuq aghneghmeng pinilghiimeng igleghavigmeng \'91he was lucky to travel on such a good day\'92													to do the right, appropriate or pleasing thing						efqughute-	efqughute-	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
efsi-	sacb-	sick and tired of someone or something		
\f2\i emotional root
\f0\i0 ; efsikaa \'91he is sick and tired of her or it, rejects or dislikes her or it, doesn't want to be with her\'92; efsinaghtuq \'91he makes one not want to be around him or it\'92; efsiyugtuq \'91he is sick and tired of someone or something\'92; saghnayughngaamki efsikanka \'91although I wanted to gather them, I rejected them\'92; efsikluki pinghitanka \'91feeling them to be not good enough I didn\'92t bother with them\'92; efsiyaguteghngaamkun saghnaaqa \'91even though I had come to not want it, I did pick it\'92; atkugegni aghighllagyayek efsiyagutaak \'91he grew to not feel comfortable with this parka because it got wet\'92; naghaalguteni mekelighiighhaam efsiyagutii unaaghhaaneng ellngitnilnguq \'91the little boy got tired of his playmates since he had been with them since morning\'92	rejecting	disliking							the longer examples are from A&W				sick and tired of someone or something; rejecting; disliking				A&W 19		efsi-	efsi-	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 -\
efsug-	saceu-	shake off dirt or snow		efsugtuq \'91he is shaking himself off, brushing the dirt or snow off\'92; efsugaa \'91he is brushing the dirt or snow from her\'92; = ufsug-	brush off dirt or snow												to shake or brush off dirt or snow	jnhz[bdfnm	PE 0vcu!-		CK V & E 185 CK 		efsug-	efsug-	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1089 \u1091 \u1075 -\
efsulqutaagh-	sacek]2enf4-	stall in sailing		
\f2\i the second meaning may be Chukotkan only	
\f0\i0 shake								the shake part, in SLI, we say efsugute-				to stall in sailing; to shake				CK V & E 190 CK 		efsulqutagh-	efsulqutxgh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1089 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
efteghhilnguq*	sans5bk3e2	solid component of sea mammal fat		= efteghilnguq													the solid component of sea mammal fat		< efteq-(ng)ite-nguq				efteghhilnguq*	efteghhilnguq*	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
efteghilnguq*	sans4bk3e2	solid component of sea mammal fat		= efteghhilnguq													the solid component of sea mammal fat		< efteq-(ng)ite-nguq				efteghilnguq*	efteghilnguq*	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
efteghruk	sans4her	kelp (stem, hard, of a certain ~)		
\f2\i species identification undetermined; this kelp is found on the shore of the south side of St. Lawrence Island									
\f0\i0 it would be nice to have a better identification				stem, hard, of a certain kelp		< eftegh-ruk				efteghruk	efteghruk	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
efteq	sans2	liquid component of sea mammal fat															liquid component of sea mammal fat		PE 0vt03-				efteq	efteq	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \
eftullunaaq	sanek]/y62	rumbling noise, loud															loud rumbling noise		< eftuq-?-				eftullunaq	eftullunxq	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
eftuq	sane2	gunshot sound		eftughuutuq \'91there is a sound like gunshot\'92; eftughtaghtuq \'91there are repeated gunshot-like sounds\'92	deep popping sound	sound of gunshot											sound of gunshot; deep popping sound					; > eftullunaaq	eftuq	eftuq	\uc0\u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \
ege-	sus-	render oil from fat		eguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  egaa \'91it rendered\'92/ egestaa \'91he rendered it\'92													to render		PE 0!0-				ege-	ege-	\uc0\u1099 \u1075 \u1099 -\
Egeghaq	Sus4f2	former village on eastern side of Provideniia Bay near mouth of bay in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village on eastern side of Provideniia Bay near mouth of bay in Chukotka						Egeghaq	Egeghaq	\uc0\u1067 \u1075 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
egge-	s[s-	crimp boot soles with one\'92s teeth		eggaa \'91he crimped it\'92 / eggelleqaqa \'91I will crimp it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ggii-, egga-													to crimp boot soles with one\'92s teeth		PE k0!0-			, > eggmagh-. eggmillgha-, gguta, eggmiiq	egge-	egge-	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1099 -\
eggegkaq	s[s[rf2	dish of finely minced fresh willow leaves, minced reindeer fat and fresh seal blood															dish of finely minced fresh willow leaves, minced reindeer fat and fresh seal blood		< egge-kaq				eggegkaq	eggegkaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
eggmagh-	s[vf4-	bite repeatedly		eggmaghaa \'91he repeatedly bit it\'92 /	bite on (it)												to repeatedly bite; to bite on (it)		PE k0!ma3- (under PE k0!0-); < egge-?-				eggmagh-	eggmagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -\
eggmiigh-	s[v]74-	hold something clamping it between upper and lower teeth															to hold something clamping it between upper and lower teeth		PE k0!mi(C)- (under PE k0!0-); < egge-miigh-				eggmigh-	eggmxgh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1084 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
eggmiiq	s[v72	teeth (thing held with ~)		Qawaagem iqallugaq 
\f2\i eggmiiqluku
\f0\i0  tagitaa avaqutaminun. \'91The bird 
\f2\i carried
\f0\i0  a tom cod 
\f2\i in her mouth
\f0\i0  for her chicks.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 45)													thing held with teeth		PE k0!mi(C)- (under PE k0!0-); < egge-miiq				eggmiq	eggmxq	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1084 \u1251 \u1179 \
eggmillgha-	s[vbk]5f-	speak or simply vocalize in anger or contempt while clamping one's lower lip between one's teeth		eggmillghaaq \'91he vocalized this way\'92 / eggmillghataa \'91he vocalized this way at her\'92													to speak or simply vocalize in anger or contempt while clamping one's lower lip between one's teeth		< egge-?-				eggmillgha-	eggmillgha-	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1072 -\
eggneke-	s[y]s2s-	go straight through without stopping		tesqawhken maavek eggnekumalghii \'91he came here straight from the northeast\'92; aghuliighpenaamta maavek eggnekukut \'91we came directly here without stopping\'92; eggnekfikaa \'91he went on to it without stopping\'92									entry explained as: nagneqa, which VK glosses as \'91going right straight through\'92 which sounds good				to go straight through without stopping				A&W 19		eggneke-	eggneke-	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
eggngighteqe-	s[3]b5ns2s-	try to complete a task		ulimaani eggngightequtkaqeftaa taaqaghaghhnaluku \'91he was really trying to complete his carving in order to be finished with\'92; eggngighteqneghutmineng taaqutuq \'91he is finishing his work because of his general determination to complete tasks\'92; igaghyalleni eggngightequtkaa apeghiighaghhnaluku \'91he is determined to complete his schooling in order to finish with it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  eggngiigmeng	complete (try to ~ a task)	effort (make an ~)							check example with taaqutuq which was given as taquutuq; also, entry explained as: taaqunnaqa, which VK glosses as \'91trying to complete a task\'92 (sounds okay)				to try to complete a task; to make an effort				A&W 19		eggngighteqe-	eggngighteqe-	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1187 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
eggngiigmeng	s[3]7uvs3	putting more effort into it		
\f2\i particle 
\f0\i0  aghnam alangqughiitani ivaneghmeng aghtughluku iilqayagusaghluku eggngiigmeng alla ivanqigtaa \'91the woman, after finding that couldn\'92t  manage looking for her ring and was going to quit, looked for it again putting more effort into it\'92; ullghitak iilqayagullukek eggngiigmeng alla piyaqminikek igleghsimalghiik \'91after giving up on his snow-machine he put more effort into it, and it was moving\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  eggngighteqe-	effort (putting more ~ into it)								check; explained as: alla qevuutaghaghluni sagiqataaghaghluni sangwaa pinqigtekanga, which VK translates as \'91doing something with a little more effort\'92; this is an abl.-mod. form -- is there a more basic noun or verb form				putting more effort into it		< ?-
\f2\i ablative-modalis		
\f0\i0 A&W 19		eggngigmeng	eggngxgmeng	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1187 \u1100 \u1251 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \
eghhae	s5fs	dermatitis		= ghhaa	dry, flaky, whitish skin patch especially on the face												dermatitis; dry, flaky, whitish skin patch especially on the face						eghhae	eghhae	\uc0\u1099 \u1203 \u1072 \u1099 \
eghhe-	s5s-	dermatitis (have ~)		kemgan nalighnegha eghlluni ayuqeftuq \'91part of his skin apparently looks like it has white patches on it\'92	dry, flaky, whitish skin patch especially on the face (have ~)												to have dermatitis; to have dry, flaky, whitish skin patches especially on the face				AYW 19		eghhe-	eghhe-	\uc0\u1099 \u1203 \u1099 -\
eghhunneghagu	s5ey]s4fue	every day		
\f2\i particle; literally
\f0\i0 , \'91whenever day comes upon it\'92;  eghhunneghagu igaghyaataqelghiit tawani aflumi \'91every day they go to school at the same time\'92; = aghhunneghagu									check, but looks okay, explained as: unaaminghagu, which VK translates as \'91when it is the next day\'92				every day		< eghte-(u)te-
\f2\i contemporative 		
\f0\i0 A&W 19		eghhunneghagu	eghhunneghagu	\uc0\u1099 \u1203 \u1091 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \
eghhwaaqaghte-	s5162f5ns-	thrust into a hole		eghhwaaqaghtuq \'91he got something thrust into his throat\'92; eghhwaaqaghtaa \'91he thrust something into his (another\'92s) throat\'92 / mekelghiighhaq eghhwaaqaghsimalghii alquutameng \'91the little boy accidently got a spoon thrust into his throat\'92; uyughani unaghsiighwaghmeng eghhwaaqaghtaa \'91he accidently thrust a stick into his brother's throat\'92													to thrust into a hole; to thrust something into, or get something thrust into, one's throat						eghhwaqaghte-	eghhwxqaghte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1203 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
eghneq	s4ys2	day		= aghneq	today (when used as a particle)												day; today		PY 03n0q (under 030-\super 2\nosupersub ); < eghte\super 1\nosupersub -neq\super 2				\nosupersub eghneq	eghneq	\uc0\u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
eghqaalingite-	s526kb3bns-	thrifty (be ~)		eghqaalingilnguq enkaam quunpeng sameng pilek \'91she does not discard things and so she always has something\'92; eghqaalingilnguq \'91thrifty person\'92	discard (not ~ things)	wasteful (not be ~)							check, but looks okay, given as eghqaalingilnguq which is explained as aflenganeq, which VK translates as \'91thrifty person\'92				to be thrifty; to not discard things; to not be wasteful		< egte-?-(ng)ite-		A&W 19		eghqalingite-	eghqxlingite-	\uc0\u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
eghqaaq	s5262	red-throated loon			Gavia stellata	loon, red-throated											red-throated loon (Gavia stellata)		PE qaq9a3 and qaq9a(C)u3				eghqaq	eghqxq	\uc0\u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u257 \u1179 \
eghqaataqe-	s526nf2s-	spread out		eghqaataquq \'91it is spread out, he is sprawled out\'92; eghqaataqii \'91he discarded them\'92 / igalluget eghqaataqumakangi \'91he threw out the old books\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  egte-	scatter	discard many things at once								sprawl out			to be spread out; to be scattered; to scatter; to discard many things at once						eghqataqe-	eghqxtaqe-	\uc0\u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
eghqwaagh-	s52164-	offering (make an ~ of food) 		
\f2\i done in gratitude for nature's bounty, the rest of the food being distributed and eaten --  a traditional practice; cf. 
\f0\i0 aghqe-\super 1\nosupersub  													to make an offering of food						eghqwagh-	eghqwxgh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
eghte-
\f3\b \super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub s5ns-\'a1	dawn comes		eghtuq \'91day broke, it is dawn\'92 / eghhutaa \'91dawn came on him\'92; qiighwqaangaaghmi eghhutaa \'91he woke up with a bad cold\'92; = aghte-	day breaks												to dawn; for day to break		PE 030-\super 2			\nosupersub eghhunneghagu, eghneq	eghte-1	eghte-1	\uc0\u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub eghte-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub s5ns-\'99	recur			happen again	repeat											to recur; to happen again; to repeat						eghte-2	eghte-2	\uc0\u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub Egkughaq	S[re4f2	Camp Collier (Kangii) (site near ~ before Southside River on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site near Camp Collier (Kangii) before Southside River on St. Lawrence Is.		< egkuq-ghaq				Egkughaq	Egkughaq	\uc0\u1067 \u1093 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
egkuq	s[re2	back of room or land area		naayvam paga egkwaani utaqiigaqut \'91they are waiting at the inland end of the lake\'92; ingleghem egkwaani naniq ataasiq \'91at the far end of the room (bed) is  one seal oil lamp\'92; naayvaq egkughtaghput \'91we went by the far end of the lake\'92	headwaters of river	inland part							we already had this but A&W explains it as: kiwalighneq, kelulighneq, which VK translates as \'91more of an inland\'92				back of room or land area; headwaters of river; inland part		PY-S 0!kuq		A&W 19	Egkughaq	egkuq	egkuq	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \
egllipa	s[k]bgf	sourdough bread (Russian)		Aghhutanga tamaaghhan neqekrangllaghllaguftuq estugaghmeggnun, 
\f2\i eghllipameng
\f0\i0  tamaaken. \'91Every day evidently he was busy making bread for their store, 
\f2\i Russian sourdough bread
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:214)	bread (Russian sourdough ~)												Russian sourdough bread		
\f4 probably from Russian 
\f0 [kt,
\f4  (xleb) \'92bread\'92, probably via Chukchi qlevan, qlep \'91bread\'92 	
\f0 15			egllipa	egllipa	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \
egllu, eglluk	s[k]/. s[k]/r	stove		
\f2\i dual,
\f0\i0  eglluk 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  egllugek
\f2\i , often used for one stove													
\f0\i0 stove		PE k0klu(!)				egllu, eglluk	egllu, eglluk	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 , \u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
egmigh-	suvb4-	rush by without stopping		egmightuq \'91he rushed by\'92 / egmiimalghiit aghuliiqaghpenateng \'91they passed by and didn't stop\'92; egmightesqughii aqfaatullghiit \'91he let the runners go by without having them stop\'92	go all the way to one\'92s destination without stopping												to rush by without stopping; to go all the way to one\'92s destination without stopping		PE 0!mi3-			; > egmiinaq	egmigh-	egmigh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 -\
egmightaataq	suvb5n6nf2	competition (in singing, wrestling, etc.)		tughumghameng egmightaataallghiit aqelqam meklengiighem kayaalqumakangi \'91in the wrestling contest the visiting boy won\'92	contest												competition (in singing, wrestling, etc.); contest	cjcnzpfybt d gtybb	< egmigh-?-(u)taq		CK V & E 100; Rub 128; Akiingqwaghneghet 114		egmightataq	egmightxtaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
egmiinaq	suv7yf2	hurry up		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  egmiinaq emta pilghaasi \'91please hurry up this time\'92	quickly												hurry up; quickly		< egmigh-(ng)inagh-				egminaq	egmxnaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
egnaangite-	suy63bns-	slow or slothful (be ~)		egnaangituq \'91he is slow (habitually)\'92 /													to be slow or slothful				VK		egnangite-	egnxngite-	\uc0\u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
egsuk	s[c/r	hide (upper part of animal ~ near scalp)		egsugakun petugluku megha sipegtaa \'91after fastening its (the hide\'92s) upper part she removed the water from it\'92; awataghpagkaq egsuganeng nayugyaghqaaguq \'91the sealskin that will be made into a float is to be skinned starting from its upper part\'92	scalp (upper part of animal hide near ~)								check, but looks okay; explained as: amiiram naasqwan tungangi, which VK translates as above				upper part of animal hide near scalp				A&W 20		egsuk	egsuk	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
egte-	s[ns-	throw away		egtaa \'91he threw it away\'92 / egtiiq \'91he threw something away\'92; egtutaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  eggutaa \'91he threw it away with the rest\'92, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he threw something away for her\'92; egtigu \'91throw it away!\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  eghqaataqe-													to throw away		PE 0!0t-				egte-	egte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
egtug-	s[neu-	anxious		
\f2\i emotional root; 
\f0\i0 egtugyugtuq \'91he is anxiously anticipating something\'92; egtugnaghtuq \'91it makes one anxious\'92; egtukaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  egtugyukaa \'91he is anxiously anticipating it\'92; egtugnaq \'91a cause of anxiety\'92; egtuketaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  egtugyuketaq \'91one who is anxious by nature\'92; egtugniquq \'91he is extremely anxious about something\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  egyug-													anxious		PE 0!tu!-			> egtugte-	egtug-	egtug-	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 -\
egtughyaq 	s[ne4mz2	creature, legendary		
\f2\i variously described as a sea-squirt or a lemming-like rodent with double claws; note that the Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik and Inupiaq cognates of this word mean
\f0\i0  'mosquito'	legendary creature	lemming-like creature								sea-squirt-like creature			legendary creature; lemming-like creature; sea-squirt-like creature		PE k0!tu3ya3                                                                     				egtughyaq 	egtughyaq 	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
egtugneq	s[neuys2	heartbeat			pulse												heartbeat; pulse		< egtugte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub egtugneq	egtugneq	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
egtugte-	s[ne[ns-	pounding heart (have a ~)		egtugtuq \'91his heart is pounding\'92 / egtugneqegtaq \'91someone with a strong heart\'92													to have a pounding heart		< egtug-?-			> egtugneq	egtugte-	egtugte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b egtugute-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub s[neuens-\super \'a1	\nosupersub worried (get ~)		pennamun qantaghallilghii mughunniighta qawalghun esghaghluku egtugusimaaq \'91when the hunter was nearing the cliffs, he became worried seeing the numerous birds around him\'92													to get worried		< egtugte-(u)te-		CK Rub 572		egtugute-1	egtugute-1	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub egtugute-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub s[neuens-\super \'99	\nosupersub gather		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 unaami taghtughyami egtugusimaa nunalgutetuqalgun pangeghhnaluni \'91in the morning when they awoke a group of neighbors gathered to make a trip to the other side (to St. Lawrence Is. from Chukotka)\'92													to gather				CK Rub 572		egtugute-2	egtugute-2	\uc0\u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub egyug-	sum/u-	act too soon without considering the consequences		egyugtuq \'91he acted too soon\'92 / egyugutaa \'91he acted on it too soon\'92; aghveq taawa egyugusimakangat aghveqluku \'91they harpooned the whale sooner than they should have\'92; egyugtuq nalugvigmun \'91 he went to the airport to early\'92; Ketmun 
\f2\i egyugluta
\f0\i0  imaghlliightukut. \'91We went out 
\f2\i too soon
\f0\i0  and ran into rough seas.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 45)									I can\'92t find the gloss \'91to order to to dismount\'92 at V & E 172 (SAJ)				to act too soon without considering the consequences				CK V & E 172 (2nd gloss)		egyug-	egyug-	\uc0\u1099 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
egzi	supb	scratched part of walrus hide		amiiqiyughngaamteggu egzingapigtuq \'91although we wanted to make it into a whole hide (as for a boat skin) it had lots of scratches\'92; uvin\'92ga egziluni ayuquq \'91its hide seems to have lots of scratches\'92	walrus hide (scratched part of ~)	dandruff 							Rub. has exactly this word, but glossed as perxot\'92 \'91dandruff\'92 ???; check; A&W explain it as: ayveghem uvin\'92gi teragaghtalleghtuqat, with VK translates as above; note that Turner for CAY has iqchit \'91dandruff\'92, and in Inupiaq there is iqsu \'91dandruff\'92 -- so what gives???				scratched part of walrus hide; dandruff				A&W 20, Rub. 577		egzi	egzi	\uc0\u1099 \u1075 \u1079 \u1080 \
egzinga-	supb3f-	scratched up (be all ~ (of walrus hide))		egzingaaq \'91it is scratched up\'92 / amiiqiyughngaamgteggu egzingapigtuq \'91although we wanted to save the walrus hide for boat covering, it was very scratched up\'92													to be all scratched up (of walrus hide)						egzinga-	egzinga-	\uc0\u1099 \u1075 \u1079 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 -\
ellmaaghaghhaq*	sk]v64f5f2	little bit more		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  huuk, ellmaaghaghhaq sayugteggu angyaq \'91okay, pull the boat a little bit more\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ellmaakwaaqun													a little bit more		PE 0@ma3(a3)				ellmaghaghhaq*	ellmxghaghhaq*	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
ellmaakwaaqun	sk]v6r162ey	some later time		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 ellmaakwaaqun pinakesi do it at some later time; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ellmaaghaghhaq													at some later time		PE 0@ma3(a3)				ellmakwaqun	ellmxkwxqun	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u257 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
ellmaaragte-	sk]v]6hf[ns-	die down (of wind)		
\f2\i Ellmaaraggneghaninguq
\f0\i0  maaqneghem sukatepiglluki ayguutaqsaqangi. \'91Whenever 
\f2\i the wind died down
\f0\i0 , it is said, the current would carry them quickly northwards.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:118)	wind dies down	weather clears up								clear up (of weather)			for wind to die down; for weather to clears up		PE 0@ma3(a3)				ellmaragte-	ellmxragte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u1100 \u257 \u1088 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ellmeng	sk]v]s3	themselves		
\f2\i personal pronoun													
\f0\i0 themselves		cf. PE 0@(0)&a				ellmeng	ellmeng	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \
ellmi	sk]v]b	oneself		
\f2\i personal pronoun; 
\f0\i0 Ivgamelluta nutaan maana quyngiq atghaghluni 
\f2\i ellmineng
\f0\i0  tamaani ighniightughaquq uvikaghamnnillu. \'91We\'92d be at Ivgaq when the reindeer would come down 
\f2\i on their own
\f0\i0  and give birth in our vicinity.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:98)													oneself		cf. PE 0@(0)&a			> ellmikaghti-	ellmi	ellmi	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \
ellmiga-	sk]v]buf-	paranoid (feel ~)		nenglaallghiit entaqun ellmigastaat \'91maybe the ones laughing made him feel paranoid\'92; ellmigayugumapigtut ilangi \'91some people are so paranoid\'92									check, but looks okay; explained as: pinghiteghngaatni ellmi piniluni pilghii, which VK translates as \'91being paranoid\'92				to feel paranoid		< ellmi-?		A&W 20		ellmiga-	ellmiga-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 -\
ellmigute-	sk]v]buens-	stain or odor (become permanent or almost so (of ~))		aghvikagka pegnem ghevestagka ellmigutkak \'91I finally removed the set-in stain when I washed it\'92; ellmigutfagilgakek aghvigkek \'91wash it before it (i.e. it stain) gets set\'92	permanent (become ~ or almost so (of stain or odor))	set (become ~ (of stain or odor))							check; A&W gives this as the predictable derived noun, ellmigutkaq, and explain it as: taaputkaq, nevegkaq, which VK translates as \'91stain or odor that has soaked through and set in				to become permanent or almost so (of stain or odor)				A&W 20		ellmigute-	ellmigute-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ellmikaghti-	sk]v]brf5nb-	words come back at one adversely (have one\'92s ~)		ellmikaghtiiq \'91what he said came back at him\'92													to have one's words come back at one adversely		< ellmi-?-				ellmikaghti-	ellmikaghti-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1080 -\
ellnga	sk]3f	he		
\f2\i personal pronoun	
\f0\i0 she												he; she		PE 0@(0)&a				ellnga	ellnga	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1072 \
ellngaan	sk]3]6y	greasy residue from a seal oil lamp		ellngaatet tagneghqwaakayuguut \'91the residue in seal oil lamps become very dark\'92													greasy residue from a seal oil lamp		< ellngagh-(u)n				ellngan	ellngxn	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1100 \u257 \u1085 \
ellngaasitaq	sk]3]6cbnf2	container for catching lamp residue (placed under oil lamp)		ellngaasitaq tevnayukan niivigu \'91if it\'92s going to overflow, spill out the container for lamp residue\'92; Teghlam tuguluku 
\f2\i ellngaasitaq
\f0\i0 , uugtuq uyghagmun, taagken kuuvaa 
\f2\i ellngaasitaq
\f0\i0 . Maateghhaq meteghlluk tagneghtaa. \'91The owl took the 
\f2\i container for sooty lamp residue
\f0\i0 , got up on the rock, and then poured out the 
\f2\i containerful 
\f0\i0  (over the raven).\'92 (AANGHHAQ 28)													container for catching lamp residue  (placed under oil lamp)		< ellngaan-li-(u)taq				ellngasitaq	ellngxsitaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1100 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ellngagh-	sk]3]f4-	leak out liquid (as from hole in container)		ellngaghtuq \'91it is leaking out liquid\'92 / ellngaataa \'91it is leaking on him\'92; qaltam megha sukalluni ellngaghtuq \'91the water in the bucked leaked out fast\'92; naayvam ulevelleghllaga ellngaghraagumaaq \'91some of the water in the overflowing lake has drained out\'92; ellngaqayuk \'91leaky thing\'92													to leak out liquid (as from hole in container)		PY 0@&a3-			; > ellngaan,  ellngaasitaq, ellngaghvik	ellngagh-	ellngagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ellngaghseketagh--	sk]3]f5csrsnf4-	drain completely		mesiilghutak ellngagjhseketaghagka \'91I drained the oil container completely\'92													to drain completely		< ellngagh-?		VK\'92s notes		ellngaghseketagh-	ellngaghseketagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1100 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ellngaghseketaq	sk]3]f5csrsnf2	drip catcher		mesiilghutak ellngalghiik ellngaghseketighlutek ayuquk \'91there is an open container under the stove oil reservoir to catch the drip\'92									explained as: ellngalghiimun asiliqutaq, which VK translates as \'91a container that is used to catch a drip\'92 				drip catcher		< ellngagh-?		A&W 20		ellngaghseketaq	ellngaghseketaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1100 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Ellngaghvik	Sk]3]f4dbr	July		
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91time to leak out\'92; 
\f2\i so called because of water coming out on the surface of the ground at this time of the year; also given in various sources as 
\f0\i0 May, June, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  May-June													July		< ellngagh-vik				Ellngaghvik	Ellngaghvik	\uc0\u1067 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
ellnginaq	sk]3byf2	oneself (alone)		ellnginaaguq \'91he is by himself\'92; ellnginaagunga \'91I am by myself\'92; 
\f2\i this can also function in the quantifier/qualifier construction:
\f0\i0  Aghnaghaq taana 
\f2\i ellnginaghhaan
\f0\i0  angayuqagkenka unilleqaak. \'91Her parents will leave 
\f2\i only
\f0\i0  that girl behind.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:13); Iwerngaqun taawani Atayaghhaam guygungan nalighneghani Kuulunkut tawantut 
\f2\i ellnginaghhaghmeng
\f0\i0 . \'91However there to one side or another of Atayaghhaq\'92s summer house  Kuulu and family 
\f2\i alone
\f0\i0  were there.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGEGH. 1:12); Sangavek agavek nemun agliigasin, 
\f2\i ellnginaghhaghpek
\f0\i0  pellaghyugigasiin? \'91Why do you never go to a house over there ; aren\'92t you ever 
\f2\i lonesome
\f0\i0  by yourself?\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGEGH. 2:266)	alone												oneself (alone)		< ell(nga/mi/pek)-(ng)inaq				ellnginaq	ellnginaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
ellngit	sk]3bn	they		
\f2\i personal pronoun) 
\f0\i0 ellngitnituq \'91he is or has been with them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ellngitni 
\f2\i plus obsolete
\f0\i0  *etuq 
\f2\i from  obsolete
\f0\i0  *ete- \'91to be\'92)	them												they; them		PE 0@(0)&a				ellngit	ellngit	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \
elngaatall	sk36nfk]	very		
\f2\i particle
\f0\i0 ; elngaatall aghitqumakanganga \'91I got very wet\'92; Uutqiiqaghluten 
\f2\i elngaatall
\f0\i0  ketanqumeng takunaken qawawaangllaqan taana niinghusimaghpek, qesiqaamaan. \'91First go backward, then run 
\f2\i very hard
\f0\i0 , approaching that figurine you made as you jump and as you spit at it.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:29); = enngaatall	very much												very; very much		from Chukchi 0n&atal \'91exceptionally; this time\'92; 0n&0tek \'91lately\'92				elngatall	elngxtall	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \
elngaatatlu	sk36nfnk]/	very much also		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 very much also		< elngaatall-llu				elngatatlu	elngxtatlu	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
elpeg-	sk]gsu-	edgy (being ~)		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  elpegyuglunga qikmit qilulghiit qineghsalghiinga qimugsiq kaataqeftuq \'91sensing something when the dogs were barking I looked outside and (saw that) a dog team was arriving\'92; elpekaa \'91he became aware of it\'92; elpekumakanga ighniyugniluku \'91he became aware that she was in labor\'92	sensing something	aware (being ~ of something)							check; explained as: kelengayuq (probably for kelengayuk), which VK glosses as \'91being edgy\'92				being edgy; sensing something; being aware of something		PE 0lp0k0-		A&W 20		elpeg-	elpeg-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 -\
elpegrightugh-	sk]gsuhb5ne4-	sense something		sameng elpegrightughaqsiin? \'91what do you sense?\'92; elpekeraaghmelnguq sameng elpegrightughta? \'91what does he sense, that person who easily senses things?\'92									check, explained as: elpekilghii, which VK translates as \'91sensing something\'92 				to sense something		< elpeg-?-		A&W 20		elpegrightugh-	elpegrightugh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
elpek	sk]gsr	you		
\f2\i personal pronoun; 
\f0\i0 elpetek \'91you (dual)\'92; elpesi \'91you (plural)\'92													you (singular)						elpek	elpek	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \
elqegkaq	sk]2s[rf2	sourdock		= alqegkaq	arctic dock	Rumex arcticus											sourdock; arctic dock
\f2\i  (Rumex arcticus)						
\f0\i0 elqegkaq	elqegkaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
elqemsiighwagh-	sk]2svc741f4-	delirious (be ~)		elqemsiighwaghtuq \'91he is delirious\'92 / puqleghallghan elqemsiighwaghtestaa \'91his fever made him delirious\'92	doze lightly dreaming a little												to be delirious; to doze lightly dreaming a little						elqemsighwagh-	elqemsxghwagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
elqiigh-	sk]274-	sunshade (use one's hand as a sunshade)		elqiightuq \'91he\'92s using his hand as a sunshade\'92 / Apaka qaasqami angyanun 
\f2\i elqiiqwaaquq
\f0\i0 . \'91My grandfather is 
\f2\i shielding his eyes
\f0\i0  from the sun 
\f2\i with his hand
\f0\i0   in [watching] for boats from the beach.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 46)	put on a peak-cap or visor												to use one's hand as a sunshade; to put on a peak-cap or visor		PE t0@qi9a3				elqigh-	elqxgh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1271 -\
elqiilek	sk]27ksr	bird type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined									
\f0\i0 what kind?				bird type		< elqiiq-lek				elqilek	elqxlek	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
Elqiilek	Sk]27ksr	Gambell (second point on west coast south of ~)		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91one with a visor\'92; 
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Nekeelit Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.												second point on west coast south of Gambell; Nekeelit Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		< elqiiq-lek				Elqilek	Elqxlek	\uc0\u1067 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
elqiiq	sk]272	visor															visor		PE t0@qi9a3			> elqiilek	elqiq	elqxq	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1179 \
elqugh-	sk]2e4-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > elqughaghte-, elqughtagh-, elqughute-, elqughutngagh-															PE 0@qu3-				elqugh-	elqugh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
elqughaghte-	sk]2e4f5ns-	hit the mark		elqughaghtaa \'91he hit it right on the spot, got it just right\'92 / elqughaghutuq \'91he hit something, got something just right\'92; elqughaghsimakanga qawaak guutkani \'91he shot the duck right where he wanted to\'92; eltughaghma allgellgha elqughaghutuq whanga allgellellemnun \'91 my grandchild\'92s birthday came exactly on my birthday\'92	get (it) just right												to hit on the mark; to get (it) just right		< elqugh-aghte- (?)				elqughaghte-	elqughaghte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
elqughtagh-	sk]2e5nf4-	confront one concerning his accusations against you		elqughtaghtuq \'91he confronted someone\'92; elqughtaghaa \'91he confronted her\'92 /													to confront one concerning his accusations against you		< elqugh-?-				elqughtagh-	elqughtagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
elqughte-	sk]2e5ns-	tell the facts about something no matter how unpleasant they may be		elqughlluku pikanga enkaam sameng akinneghitaa \'91after he told the truth about her she didn\'92t answer back at all\'92; elqughlluku yuuk aapqangat igleghutipallginniluku \'91they were correct in saying that the man was not a very good leader\'92									check, but probably okay				to tell the facts about something no matter how unpleasant they may be		< elqugh-?-		A&W 21		elqughte-	elqughte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
elqughute-	sk]2e4ens-	right (do something ~)		elqughutuq \'91he behaved correctly\'92 / elqughutegpenaninguq aghnaghaq quunpeng \'91all the time the girl was not doing what was right\'92	behave correctly												to do something right; to behave correctly		< elqugh- ?-				elqughute-	elqughute-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
elqughutngagh-	sk]2e4en3f4-	lucky (be ~)		Ullghitagka allgeghuteqaghtagka 
\f2\i elqughutngalngiimeng
\f0\i0  tafsimeng. \'91For my wheeled/tracked vehicle I happened to get 
\f2\i just the right
\f0\i0  belt.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 46)													to be lucky		< elqugh-?-				elqughutngagh-	elqughutngagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
elquneghraak	sk]2eys4h6r	walrus skull		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual,
\f0\i0  elquneghraagek
\f2\i , for one skull													
\f0\i0 walrus skull		< elquneq-raak		CK Rub 306		elquneghrak	elquneghrxk	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
elquneq	sk]2eys3	whale skull		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 elqunghek
\f2\i , for one skull													
\f0\i0 whale skull		cf. PY-S il0quq \'91brain\'92, but note Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik 0@qupak \'91big kettle\'92		CK Rub 306; also in SLI texts		elquneq	elquneq	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \
elqunevraak	sk]2eysdg6r	walrus skull		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  elqunevraagek, 
\f2\i for one skull; 
\f0\i0 Kaallukek 
\f2\i elqunevraagek
\f0\i0  tallimineng pategyaqminikek uka leveklutun mekelghiighmun tagistaak. \'91When it got to the 
\f2\i walrus skull
\f0\i0  and swatted it with its paw it sent it flying toward the boy with a whizzing sound.\'92 (SULUWET 97)	skull of walrus												walrus skull						elqunevrak	elqunevrxk	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1087 \u257 \u1082 \
elqwaapik	sk]216gbr	palmated kelp		
\f2\i species identification undetermined	
\f0\i0 kelp, palmated												palmated kelp		< elqwaaq-pik				elqwapik	elqwxpik	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
elqwaaq	sk]2162	kelp			
\f2\i Laminaria sp.												
\f0\i0 kelp
\f2\i  (Laminaria sp.)		
\f0\i0 PE q0lqu9a3			> elqwaapik	elqwaq	elqwxq	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
elte-	sk]ns-	leak air (out)		eltuq \'91it leaked air, it deflated\'92 / eltestaa \'91he deflated it\'92; elsimaaq \'91it has deflated\'92; eltengngaaq \'91it is deflated\'92; =
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 este-	deflate												to leak air (out); to deflate		PE n0l0t- (under PE n0l03(-))			; > eltekeltagh-;	elte-	elte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1099 -\
eltekeltagh-	sk]nsrsk]nf4-	giggle		eltekeltaghtuq \'91he is giggling\'92 / yughaghvigmi aghnaghaat wasiwa eltekeltaghnaqlaataghtut Santimi \'91the girls are going to giggle in church once again this Sunday\'92	snicker												to giggle; to snicker		< elte-?-				eltekeltagh-	eltekeltagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
eltugh-	sk]ne4-	stuck (be ~)		eltughtuq \'91it got stuck, he can't go on\'92 / qamiskek yugem ugharrakun eltuumalghiik \'91the man's sled got stuck in the mud\'92	caught (be ~)	unable to proceed (be ~)											to be stuck; to be caught; to be unable to proceed		PE tat(0)tu3- (under PE tat0-) (?)			; > eltughneq, eltuqsaq	eltugh-	eltugh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
eltughaq*	sk]ne4f2	grandchild		eltughaanka \'91my grandchildren\'92													grandchild		PE 0ltu3				eltughaq*	eltughaq*	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
eltughneq	sk]ne4ys2	ice (pile of chunks of sea ~ extending down to ocean floor held there by weight of ice above water surface)		
\f2\i see item 11 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	pressure ridge stuck to bottom of sea	sea ice type											pile of chunks of sea ice extending down to ocean floor held there by weight of ice above water surface; pressure ridge stuck to bottom of sea		< eltugh-neq\super 2				\nosupersub eltughneq	eltughneq	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
eltuqsaq	sk]ne2cz2	obstruction of any sort		nuluusima uskughaa eltuqsalguuq \'91my fishing line has a knot that keeps it from unreeling\'92; umyugakek eltuqsalguuk yugem \'91the man had in mind a reason to disagree\'92													obstruction of any sort		< eltugh-?-				eltuqsaq	eltuqsaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
em-may	sv-vfq	mother		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); endearing form													
\f0\i0 mother				CK Rub 578		emay	emay	\uc0\u1099 \u1084 -\u1084 \u1072 \u1253 \
emama	svfvf	child's word used when he/she wants to suck breast or bottle															child's word used when he/she wants to suck breast or bottle						emama	emama	\uc0\u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \
Emeghaq	Svs4f2	Mugum Peak on St. Lawrence Is. (lagoon seaward of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 lagoon seaward of Mugum Peakon St. Lawrence Is.						Emeghaq	Emeghaq	\uc0\u1067 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
emgaari	svu6hb	pole (foundation ~, usually whale rib, around the periphery of the traditional dome-shaped house)															foundation pole, usually whale rib, around the periphery of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 578		emgari	emgxri	\uc0\u1099 \u1084 \u1075 \u257 \u1088 \u1080 \
emsighqe-	svcb52s-	mend by sewing.		
\f2\i Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0 amsighqe-													to mend by sewing						emsighqe-	emsighqe-	\uc0\u1099 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
emta	svnf	differently (this time act ~)		
\f2\i particle; used with negative commands;
\f0\i0   emta muluughpenang \'91don\'92t be late this time\'92; igaqigu aatghen emta anglipafqaan \'91write your name but don\'92t make it big this time\'92; emta sukalluten \'91this time be fast\'92; Navek yugsughangigalnguut. 
\f2\i Emta
\f0\i0  tawaten piluteng, piyaalluteng, 
\f2\i emta
\f0\i0  yugsughagpenateng piyaaluteng tuvaq naamiglluku, uteghmun qiivyalghiimeng, uyughaat aviituq. \'91They don\'92t look around anywhere. 
\f2\i Again
\f0\i0  they went like that, went hunting on the ice, 
\f2\i again
\f0\i0  not looking around going all the way through the shore-fast ice. When they looked back, their brother was missing.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:12); Whaanguq aghnaghaam pii aghnalqwaaq taawna, \'93
\f2\i Emta
\f0\i0  pigpenaan, nelliqutkegpenaan ugiknaqaqangam taana. 
\f2\i Emta
\f0\i0  avelghaghhu nelliqutkegpenaan.\'94 \'91They said, now the girl said to the old woman over by the door, \'93Don\'92t do anything to him 
\f2\i again
\f0\i0 , don\'92t mess with him. I am going to have him as a husband. 
\f2\i This time
\f0\i0  leave him alone, don\'92t mess with him.\'94\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:5)	change (for a ~)	instead								again			this time act differently; for a change; instead; again		from Chukchi \'910mto \'91suppose, what if\'92 				emta	emta	\uc0\u1099 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \
emuri	svehb	fish guts which are in a dugout or used to feed dogs		
\f2\i questioned									
\f0\i0 Is this good? ???				fish guts which are in a dugout or used to feed dogs		from Chukchi ?	x			emuri	emuri	\uc0\u1099 \u1084 \u1091 \u1088 \u1080 \
emyugak	svm/ufr	Adam\'92s Apple		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 Adam\'92s Apple				CK Rub 578		emyugak	emyugak	\uc0\u1099 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \
en-nanaayuq	sy-yfy6/r	maybe		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exclamatory particle	
\f0\i0 perhaps								what does the double n mean in Rub.? - gemination?				maybe; perhaps	vj;tn ,snm. djpvj;yj	from Chukchi ?	x	Rub. 579		en-nanayuq	en-nanxyuq	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 -\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u257 \u1102 \u1082 \
enaangaay	sy636q	mother		
\f2\i endearing vocative form used in stories
\f0\i0 ; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 naa													mother						enangay	enxngxy	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u257 \u1253 \
enan	syfy	and then		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Sagiqegkan pinaken, \'93
\f2\i Enan
\f0\i0  unaami ungipaannaghamken\'94. If he persists, just respond to him, \'93
\f2\i It would be best if later on
\f0\i0  -- I\'92ll tell you tomorrow.\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 12)	and further	later on								when better conditions prevail			and then; and further; later on; when better conditions prevail		from Chukchi 0nan \'91let\'92			>enankin, enanaayuk	enan	enan	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \
enanaayuk	syfy6/r	anticipated (it is ~ that)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  enanaayuk upenghaqun ayveq kaallequq \'91one anticipates that in the coming spring walrus will arrive\'92; enanaayuk aghvengegkata mangtagtuullequsi \'91it is anticipted that you together will eat muktuk when they catch a whale\'92									check, explained as: enankin, which VK translates as \'91something that is anticipated that will happen\'92; 				it is anticipated that		< enan-?				enanayuk	enanxyuk	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u257 \u1102 \u1082 \
enankin	syfyrby	let other(s) do it because they are better able to		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 enankin aghulallget aghulaaghllit \'91let the ones dance who know how to dance better\'92; Avaqutaghhaanka neghesqelluki neqellgaanayukavek 
\f2\i enankin
\f0\i0 , aagvikamken. 'In order to let my dear children eat, in case you have food 
\f2\i (as you certainly must)
\f0\i0 , I come by here.' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:232); Aghnaghaq piyugumalghii enkaam uyughani pimakanga, \'93
\f2\i Enankin
\f0\i0  yugulghiiten. Inglukusagusaghqaaghsimaaten yulgutevnun.\'94 \'91The girl walked, then said to her brother, \'93
\f2\i Without doubt
\f0\i0  you are a man. You are to be an opponent of your fellow men.\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 160)	doubtlessly	certainly											let other(s) do it because they are better able to; doubtlessly; certainly		from Chukchi 0nanken \'91preferably, better\'92			; > enankinam	enankin	enankin	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \
enankinam 	syfyrbyfv	oh no, not again!		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 enankinam aghnaghaq qiyanaqlaataghtuq \'91oh no, the girl is crying again\'92													oh no, not again!		< enankin=am			enakinamllu	enankinam 	enankinam 	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1084 \
enankinamllu	syfyrbyfvk]/	outrageous		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  enankinamllu saam tugumaak mesiighek \'91how outrageous that someone took the fuel oil\'92									check; explained as: sullevneghhalek, taawallumaaten, which VK translates as \'91outrageousness\'92				outrageous		< enankinam=llu		A&W 21		enankinamllu	enankinamllu	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
enekiitek	sysr7nsr	well maybe, as a matter of fact		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 = inekiitek	if I do something	if perchance							?; example(s)? Rosa Irrigoo described it as, sakuma; V Tepegkaq put it as itupill				well maybe, as a matter of fact; if I do something; if perchance		from Chukchi 0n0kit \'91if\'92				enekitek	enekxtek	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
eng	s3	now		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0   Eng, estu, sayugnaanghitamken meghmun aatqaghtekuvek! \'91Now, you slide, (however) I won\'92t pull you out when you plunge into the water!\'92 (KALLAG. 19); = heng	next												now; next						eng	eng	\uc0\u1099 \u1187 \
enkaam	syr6v	then
\f2\i  (in temporal sequence)		particle: 
\f0\i0 whavek llinaqaqa igan, enkaam aanaqegkuvek tugunaken \'91I'll put your paper there, then when you leave, take it\'92; Taagken tapghaghhaghmeng ivaghimalghii. Naalkusami unaghsighwaaghem iqugakun petugumakanga. 
\f2\i Enkaam
\f0\i0  asinganun uyghaggaq petugumakanga. \'91Then he looked for a child. When he found one, he tied it to the end of a stick. 
\f2\i And then
\f0\i0  he tied a rock under it.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 19); Nenglum ulimallghanun nuughtuutkaagunga. Nallukanka enkaam. \'91I missed out on the building of the underground houses. 
\f2\i So
\f0\i0  I don\'92t know about them.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:10)	furthermore	and								also			then 
\f2\i (in temporal sequence)
\f0\i0 ; furthermore; and; also		from Chukchi 0nk\'92am \'91and, then\'92			; > enkaamall, enkaamllu	enkam	enkxm	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1082 \u257 \u1084 \
enkaamllu	syr6vk]/	and also		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 and also		< enkaam=llu				enkamllu	enkxmllu	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1082 \u257 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
enkaamngam	syr6v3fv	and then again		
\f2\i particle; also: 
\f0\i0 enkaamall, enkaamanngam, enkaaangam, enkaamam													and then again		<
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 enkaam=ngam				enkamngam	enkxmngam	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1082 \u257 \u1084 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
enleg-	syksu-	attached to something secure		
\f2\i postural root: 
\f0\i0 enlegtaa \'91he attached it\'92; tapghaam iquga uyghagkun enlegngaaq \'91the end of the rope is attached to the rock to secure it\'92	fastened to something secure												attached or fastened to something secure		< enlek-?-		CK Rub 579; VK		enleg-	enleg-	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
enlegkutaq	syks[renf2	log towed by reindeer (used in training)															log towed by reindeer (used in training)		< enlek-qutaq				enlegkutaq	enlegkutaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
enlek	syksr	foundation		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  na\super e	\nosupersub main part												foundation; main part					> enlegkutaq; 	enlek	enlek	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
enmis 	syvbc	already (surprising though it may seem)		
\f2\i particle;  
\f0\i0 enmis taaqumii \'91what do you know, he's already completed it!\'92; Apasengaqruggaq pika qavaasightughluni ayagusitam saaghwani nekeghqengngwaaqruglughluni 
\f2\i enmis
\f0\i0 . Sivumnni taglaqat. \'91That good old Apassengaq is 
\f2\i already
\f0\i0  settled in pajamas up there by a support pole (of the house). They went before us.\'92 (PANGEGH. 31); Yulguluku 
\f2\i enmis
\f0\i0  angukaqaat Sikneq ukegkut kinguliit. Yulguftughnguq tamaanii yugitelleghllagem entaqun natangani yulguyaghtuq 
\f2\i enmis
\f0\i0  ingutughhaghmenguq paaghqiisan yupagiisan aghvengaghtaqut tagtalmi, Sikneghmi. \'91These last ones have 
\f2\i even
\f0\i0  seen Sikneq with people living there. They say there were people back then maybe sometime around the plague. They 
\f2\i even
\f0\i0  caught some yearling whales once in a while when there started not to be many people at Sikneq.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:22)	unexpectedly	even											already (surprising though it may seem); unexpectedly; even		from Chukchi enmec \'91because, already\'92				enmis 	enmis 	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1084 \u1080 \u1089 \
enngaatall	sy36nfk]	very		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle;
\f0\i0  Ukavek tukughqaghhalegnun ivaghingukung nani inqun pinitun kiyaghhnalutung. Qayughllak nunamnni seghletun kiyaghlleghhiikung. Umiilegput 
\f2\i enngaatall
\f0\i0  seghlepiguuq. \'91We have come this way looking for a host so we can live a better life somewhere, because in our village we have lived harshly. Our chief is 
\f2\i really
\f0\i0  terrible.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 36); Atqaghlluni aywaanun sinumun ivgaghiluni tuguluki neqmun iguquusiq quyngim kelpanga napaghsimakanga. Aleghquumaan, \'93
\f2\i Enngaatall
\f0\i0  elpek sumeghneghpetun salukimi uguqnam ilunganilnguut nusugraghaqsiki?\'94 \'91She went quickly to the pantry on the northern side and looked around, and took a reindeer antler piece that is used for taking food out of a pot and placed it upright. She said to it, \'93In your 
\f2\i great
\f0\i0  thought, what is it that you do to extract food from inside hot things?\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 85-86); = elngaatall	very much												very; very much.		from Chukchi 0n&atal \'91exceptionally; this time\'92; 0n&0tek \'91lately\'92				enngatall	enngxtall	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1187 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \
enraq	syhf2	but		
\f2\i particle; has the implication that this condition will cause a change in plans or expected outcome;
\f0\i0  aanaqsaghtunga enraq eslalluguftuq \'91I was going to go outside but it is raining\'92; qamiyek naavlutek, enraqlu usighllagulghiik \'91the sled broke down, but it was heavily loaded also\'92; taginaqniyaghluni enraqlu aghviimalghii \'91after saying that he was coming here he crossed over (to the mainland) instead\'92; enraqlu akuuraalluteng tengkayuget kaatut \'91however the airplane also came at the time\'92; Taagken qateghyiighaghhaam mengteghaq meghqun llikestaamakanga. Qamanguq yugem pimakanga nuliini, \'93Uu-ugg naken 
\f2\i enraq
\f0\i0  meghem iteghtinkut? Enta qiinqaa!\'94 \'91Then the little bird started bringing the house to the water. Inside, the man said to his wife, \'93Nasty! 
\f2\i However, 
\f0\i0 where is the water coming in from? Go take a peek outside!\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 148)	yet	still							entry already here, but some examples added from A&W	however			but; yet; still; however		from Chukchi 0nraq \'91in turn\'92		A&W 21		enraq	enraq	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
enta	synf	come on		
\f2\i particle; used when one has finished talking or when one is leaving;
\f0\i0  enta suka \'91come on hurry\'92; Upughluni aghnaq kiwanguq qiifqaghtellegaghluni piiwaragkiighluni amigmun, piinguq esghaghluku, \'93
\f2\i Enta
\f0\i0  aanaqunga, 
\f2\i enta
\f0\i0  aanaqunga,\'94 alingepiglluni pimakanga. \'91The woman was startled in the back of the house and turned around and went quickly toward the door and said to him after seeing him, \'93
\f2\i Excuse me
\f0\i0  I am leaving,
\f2\i  Excuse me
\f0\i0  I am leaving,\'94 she said fearfully.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. II:6); Seghleghhalek aqiiyak. 
\f2\i Enta
\f0\i0  tagi. Tagi neghyaghtuultung. Taakwna avelghaghluku legan. Nallukaaten. \'91Oh boy, a traveler. 
\f2\i Now
\f0\i0 , come. Come, let\'92s go eat. Just don\'92t mind those on your way. They don\'92t know you.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. III:3)	let's do it	well, let's go								excuse me (but, ...)			come on; let's do it; well, let's go; excuse me (but, ...)		perhaps  from Chukchi ?	x		; > entaa, entami, entaqun	enta	enta	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \
entaa	syn6	excuse me		
\f2\i particele; 
\f0\i0 entaa naghughtestaghtinga \'91excuse me, let me by\'92	let me see												excuse me; let me see		< enta-?-				enta	entx	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u257 \
entaaghangam	syn64f3fv	enough already!		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 enough already!		< enta-?-ngam		VK		entaghangam	entxghangam	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
entami	synfvb	well, let's see		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 entami esghaqaghlakun \'91could I just see it\'92; entamimii naaki iiggat tagivaghyaghqaghten \'91come on let me see the gloves that you are going to give me\'92													well, let's see		< enta=mi				entami	entami	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \
entaqun	synf2ey	maybe		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 entaqun eslallugughhnaqaa \'91maybe it will rain\'92; Kii, tanqiq a-a-a piituq. Qilawaaq allatmun igleghtuq. 
\f2\i Entaqun
\f0\i0  anuqa nuuggnaquq. \'91Oh, the moon has risen. The clouds are heading in a different direction. 
\f2\i Maybe
\f0\i0  the wind is going to be from a different direction.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:3); Sumemni taakut Siqlugaghyagmiit 
\f2\i entaqun
\f0\i0  200-300 
\f2\i years
\f0\i0 -ngut. I think that the Siqlugaghyak group is 
\f2\i probably
\f0\i0  200-300 years.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:4)	perhaps	probably											maybe; perhaps; probably		< enta=qun				entaqun	entaqun	\uc0\u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
epalgen	sgfkusy	layer of thickened fat in broth		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 layer of thickened fat in broth		from Chukchi epa&0 \'91boulllion\'92		CK Rub 581		epalgen	epalgen	\uc0\u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1099 \u1085 \
epe-	sgs-	stale (become ~)		epuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  epaa \'91it has lost its taste and odor\'92; Nefkuuraq 
\f2\i epumakanga
\f0\i0  eslametepagllagem. \'91Being outside too long has made the dried meat 
\f2\i lose its flavor
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 47)	flat (become ~-tasting)								given the meaning of epesigh- \'91to smother; to air out\'92, check for a broader meaning of epe- as in other Esk.				to become stale; to become flat-tasting		PE 0p0- (?)			epesigh-	epe-	epe-	\uc0\u1099 \u1087 \u1099 -\
epesigh-	sgscb4-	smother		epesiimayaghaat qaangha melluluku uglaalluku \'91they tried to smother him plugging his mouth completely\'92; epesighluku pekaghtevziimaa \'91after they tried to smother him he let him gasp only a little more\'92; uygaaq episighaqa aviituq \'91the bleached, dehaired sealskin which I put to air out has  disappeared\'92	suffocate	air out							check, but looks okay, explained as: pekaghsiq, and tepangiinnneghsiq, which VK translates as \'91to smother\'92 and \'91to air out (odor)\'92				to smother or suffocate; to air out		< epe-sigh-		A&W 21		epesigh-	epesigh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
esakemna	sczrsvyg			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 sakemna																			esakemna	esakemna	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1087 \
esamna	sczvyf			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0  saamna																			esamna	esamna	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
esavghagh-	sczd4f4-	move boat on sea ice using small sled		esavghaghtut \'91they are moving a boat\'92; esavghaghaat \'91they are moving it\'92 / = isavghagh-													to move boat on sea ice using small sled						esavghagh-	esavghagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
esavghaq	sczd4f2	person moving a boat on sea ice using a small sled		= isavghaq													person moving a boat on sea ice using a small sled						esavghaq	esavghaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
esavghaq	scfd4f2	sled used to haul a boat on the ice		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 esavghak, 
\f2\i for a single sled													
\f0\i0 sled used to haul a boat on the ice				CK Rub 581		esavghaq	esavghaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1072 \u1074 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
esgha	sc5f	look!		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  esgha taana aglaghyulghii \'91look, this person wants to go home\'92;  Whangkutaqun malikruutaghtaqunga mekestaanghitgun tamaakutgun piightaqukut. 
\f2\i Esgha
\f0\i0  tamaakut uyghaget aangepigtaqut, Neghqutemnguq tagitkaqaqii. \'91
\f2\i You see
\f0\i0 , we would play along with the smaller ones every now and then. See, those rocks are really big, they say Neghqun brought them there.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:12); Pineghmegteki, naghuyamenguq atkugpagulluteng. 
\f2\i Esgha
\f0\i0  Tuliinkut nalighneghit maaten entaqun Kiwatangaghmiit. \'91They would have seagull skin parkas. 
\f2\i Consider
\f0\i0  the Toolie family, part of them are probably from the Kiwatangaghmiit clan.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:24) 	look here!	see here!								consider!			look!; look here!; see here!; consider		< esghagh- 
\f2\i (bytruncation)				
\f0\i0 esgha	esgha	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \
esghagh-	sc5f4-	open one's eyes		esghaghtuq \'91he opened his eyes\'92; esghaghaa \'91he sees or saw it\'92 / esghaatuq \'91he saw something\'92; esghaatutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  saw each other\'92; esghaghlleqamken \'91I'll see you\'92; esghaghaa pinitun kiyaghtaalleq \'91he saw the need to change to a better way of life\'92	see												to open one's eyes; to see					; ~ esgha; > esghaaghte-, esghaghwaagh-, esghapag-, esghaqagh-, esghaqu-	esghagh-	esghagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
esghaghhu	sc5f5e	look!		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Tughneghaanghituq. Tughneghaayaquni nunameng ghhataghnganayaghtuq.  Yuguuq. Sangwaa ikfiqa. 
\f2\i Esghaghhu
\f0\i0  ikfiqeghllak sangwaa whaa mangteghamnneng naalkusimaq. \'91He is not a spirit. If he were to be a spirit, he would be floating in the air. He is a person. What is in pain? 
\f2\i You see
\f0\i0 , something that is in dreadful pain is found at our house.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. II:5); Ayveghaghluteng wallu maklaglluteng, qilunganeng entaqun ighneghllungllaghluteng, aatkameng kiighakun whaten qenleghwaaghluteng pimalghiit. Anigumeng, peghqinepigumaat esgha taagnaput, 
\f2\i esghaghhu
\f0\i0  anigumeng imighluki yugusimegteggun mengllaghyagutut. \'91They caught a walrus or bearded seal and made a container from its intestines and placed it between their clothing and body stretched across the chest. They apparently used snow to make water, 
\f2\i you see
\f0\i0  our ancestors were quite smart.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:118)	consider!												look!; consider!		< esghagh-
\f2\i optative				
\f0\i0 esghaghhu	esghaghhu	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1091 \
esghaghlaataqu-	sc5f4k9nf2e-	ignore the wishes of another because one can do so		igaghyat apeghtughiteyeng esghaghlaataqwaat pineghlliquteghllaguut \'91the students are taking advantage of their teacher by being disobedient\'92;  mekelghiighhaat uyuqlightaghteng iighhwaangesimaat esghaghlaataqum \'91the boys made their younger brother fume with rage on account of (their) ignoring (his) wishes\'92									check; explained as: piyaqliighqilghiit aagyugutkaqluki, which VK translates as \'91taking advantage of\'92				to ignore the wishes of another because one can do so				A&W 21		esghaghlataqu-	esghaghlxtaqu-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
esghaghlaataqu-	sc5f4k9nf2e-	look down on and act accordingly		igaghyat apeghtughisteyeng aghyuutiilnguq esghaghlaataqwaat \'91the students disrespect their humble teacher\'92													to look down on and act accordingly		< esghagh-laataqu-		VK		esghaghlataqu-	esghaghlxtaqu-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
esghaghte-	sc5f5ns-	show		esghaghtaa \'91he showed him something\'92 /													to show		< esghagh-te\super 1\nosupersub -				esghaghte-	esghaghte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
esghaghtugh-	sc5f5ne4-	take a good look at (the target)		ayveq esghaghtughluku guusaqminigu leganqun ifkaghtaa \'91after taking a good look at the walrus, when he had shot at it, he (saw that he) dropped (i.e., killed) it\'92; aghveq esghaghtughluku aghveqaa \'91after he took a good look at the whale he harpooned it (i.e., got it as his whale)\'92	look (take a good ~ at (the target))								check, but looks okay, explained as: nagun pilleghqaq esghaghwaaghluku, which VK translates as taking a good look at a target				to take a good look at (the target)				A&W  21		esghaghtugh-	esghaghtugh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\

\f1\b esghaghwaagh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub sc5f4164-\super \'a1	\nosupersub look carefully at something															to look carefully at something		< esghagh-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-		CK Rub 455 CK		esghaghwagh-1	esghaghwxgh-1	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub esghaghwaagh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub sc5f4164-\super \'99	\nosupersub visions (have ~)			hallucinations (have ~)												to have visions; to have hallucinations		< esghagh-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 2\nosupersub -				esghaghwagh-2	esghaghwxgh-2	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub esghalluug-	sc5fk]0u-	angrily look at someone 			look angrily at someone												to angrily look at someone 		< esghagh-?-		CK		esghallug-	esghallxg-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1075 -\
esghapag-	sc5fgfu-	watch		esghapagtuq \'91he's watching something\'92; esghapagaa \'91he's looking at it\'92 /	look at												to watch; to look at		< esghagh-vag-				esghapag-	esghapag-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
esghapagsagh-	sc5fgf[cz4-	show off															to show off		< esghapag-sagh-		CK		esghapagsagh-	esghapagsagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
esghapagsaq	sc5fgf[cz2	show (performance)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 concert	performance											show; concert; performance		< esghapag-sagh-		Rub 457		esghapagsaq	esghapagsaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
esghapiqu-	sc5fgb2e-	look or act haughty or arrogant		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 haughty (look or act ~ or arrogant)	arrogant (look or act haughty or ~)											to look or act haughty or arrogant		< esghagh-?		CK Rub 457		esghapiqu-	esghapiqu-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 -\
esghaqaaluni	sc5f26k/yb	appears (it ~ that \'85)		
\f2\i effectively a particle; 
\f0\i0 Kukulek teskiwna maaken 
\f2\i esghaqaaluni
\f0\i0 , legan napaqam uliwaaghluni ayuquq. 'When you looked out toward Kukulek from here, 
\f2\i you could see 
\f0\i0 posts all over the place' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:160); Qiighqaq 
\f2\i esghaqaaluni
\f0\i0  llangaqa qetkaq inglupigaghmeng iiggmeng, enkaam aatqaa Sivuqaq, Ulimaghistem sivuqaa. 'The shape of the 
\f2\i island looks as if
\f0\i0  it were squeezed or wrung out with one hand. So that is why it is called Sivuqaq, a word that means something "squeezed" and formed by the Creator.' (KALLAG. 8); Taagken mekelghiiq piniighqwaamakanga. 
\f2\i Esghaqaaluni
\f0\i0  nukalpigaq, pinighhalek! 'Then the boy came out in the pink of health. 
\f2\i He turned out
\f0\i0  to be a handsome young man.' (KALLAG. 57)	sees (one ~ )												it appears  that \'85; one sees		< esghagh-qagh-(ng)u-
\f2\i subordinative				
\f0\i0 esghaqaluni	esghaqxluni	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1102 \u1085 \u1080 \
esghaqagh-	sc5f2f4-	glance at		esghaqaghtuq \'91he opened his eyes briefly\'92; esghaqaghaa \'91he glanced at it\'92 / esghaqaatuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  glanced at each other;\'92 esghaqaghniighutuq \'91he cannot see any distance (because of the bad weather)\'92	open one's eyes briefly												to glance at; to open one's eyes briefly		< esghagh-qagh-				esghaqagh-	esghaqagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
esghaqu-	sc5f2e-	look around now and then for (it)		uzimun esghaquuq qikmiq esghaqwaa esnami \'91he looked around for the dog on the beach\'92													to look around now and then for (it)		< esghagh-?-				esghaqu-	esghaqu-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
esghavyu	sc5fdm/	grey dog			grey color	dog, grey											grey dog; grey color	cthsq	from Chukchi cewaro, cewarol!0n, pl. cewarot \'92grey, grey reindeer\'92	14			esghavyu	esghavyu	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1074 \u1100 \u1102 \
esiqaghte- 	scb2f5ns-	splash		esiqaghtuq \'91he splashed\'92; esiqaghtaa \'91he splashed her\'92 / = isiqaghte-													to splash		PE ciq03- and ciq(q)i-				esiqaghte- 	esiqaghte- 	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
esiqghute-	scb25ens-	toss out liquid															to toss out liquid		PE ciq03- and ciq(q)i-				esiqghute-	esiqghute-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
esiqghuute-	scb258ns-	splash when hitting the water hard															to splash when hitting the water hard		PE ciq03- and ciq(q)i-				esiqghute-	esiqghxte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1203 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
eskana	scrfyf			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 kaana																			eskana	eskana	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \

\f1\b eskiita\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub scr7nf\super s	\nosupersub ice skate		eskiitek \'91a pair of skates\'92; 
\f2\i also used in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 skate (ice ~)												ice skate		from English \'91skate\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R449)		
\f0\i0 eskitae	eskxtae	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \
eskiitiinga-	scr7n73f-	ice-skate		eskiitiingaaq \'91he is skating\'92	skate (ice-~)												to ice-skate		from English \'91skating\'92	SLI			eskitinga-	eskxtxnga-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u1251 \u1187 \u1072 -\
eskiwna	scrb1yf			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 kiiwna																			eskiwna	eskiwna	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1082 \u1080 \u1265 \u1085 \u1072 \
esla	sck]z	weather		eslami \'91outside\'92,  \'91in the outdoors\'92 	awareness	world								consiousness			weather; awareness; consciousness; world; outdoors		PE cila			> eslaghllak, eslaaghlleq, eslakeraq, eslalluk, eslalluuk, eslaniighta, eslasugnite-, eslassuusik, eslata(e)	esla	esla	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
eslaaghlleq	sck]95k]s2	shorefast ice that has blown loose from where it was fixed due a strong wind		
\f2\i see item 12 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												shorefast ice that has blown loose from where it was fixed due to a strong wind		< esla-?-lleq				eslaghlleq	eslxghlleq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
eslaghllak	sck]z5k]zr	world			universe	outdoors (the great ~)								power of weather and nature			the world; the universe; the great outdoors; the power of weather and nature		< esla-ghllak				eslaghllak	eslaghllak	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
eslakeraagh-	sck]zrsh64-	hesitate due to bad weather		tengegkayuget eslakeraaghaqut tagiyughngaaghmeng \'91the airplane hesitates to come due to bad weather\'92													to hesitate due to bad weather		< esla-?-		VK\'92s notes		eslakeragh-	eslakerxgh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
eslakeraq	sck]zrshf2	rain (light ~)			drizzle												light rain; drizzle		< esla-?-				eslakeraq	eslakeraq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
eslallekerghagh-	sck]zk]srshf4-	rain only a little															to rain only a little		< eslalluk-?-		VK\'92s notes		eslallekerghagh-	eslallekerghagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
eslallugughte-	sck]zk]/ue5ns-	rain		eslallugughtaa \'91it is raining\'92 /													to rain		< eslallug-(ng)ughte-				eslallugughte-	eslallugughte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
eslalluk	sck]zk]/r	rain															rain		< esla-lluk				eslalluk	eslalluk	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
eslalluuk	sck]zk]0r	bad weather			storm	weather, bad											bad weather; storm		< esla-?-				eslalluk	eslallxk	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1082 \
eslaneghsite-	ckzys5cbns-	improve the weather through shamanism		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to improve the weather through shamanism		< esla-?-		CK Rub 450		eslaneghsite-	eslaneghsite-	\uc0\u1089 \u1083 \u1103 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
eslaniighta	sck]zy75nf	weatherman															weatherman		< esla-niigh-(s)ta				eslanighta	eslanxghta	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
eslasugnite-	sck]zc/uybns-	sky-blue (be ~)		eslasugnituq \'91it is sky-blue\'92 /									all verbs should have a \'93realized\'94 form, such as the example above; is this one correct?				to be sky-blue		< esla-sugnite-				eslasugnite-	eslasugnite-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
eslasuusik 	sck]zc0cbr	barometer															barometer		< esla-?-(u)siq-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 eslasusik 	eslasxsik 	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \
eslata, eslataq	sck]znf. sck]znf2	area outside or around (it)		eslatngani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  eslatangani \'91in the area around it\'92; estek kakitaa eslataakun qiipaghaam \'91she sewed a pocket on the outside of the snowshirt\'92; mangtegham eslataaneng kameraagha naalkaa \'91she found his shoe outside of the house\'92	outside (area ~ or around (it))	around (area outside or ~ (it))											area outside or around (it)		< esla-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -				eslatae, eslataq	eslatae, eslataq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 , \u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
eslege-	sck]sus-	stout (be ~)		esleguq \'91it is stout\'92 / eslegellequq \'91it will be stout\'92	thick (be ~ in diameter)												to be stout; thick in diameter		PE cil0!-\super 1				\nosupersub eslege-	eslege-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 -\
esleghyu	sck]s4m/	rock, oblong or cylindrical shaped															oblong or cylindrical shaped rock						esleghyu	esleghyu	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \
esleqe-	sck]s2s-	fill up full		eslequq \'91it filled up\'92; esleqaa \'91he filled it full\'92 / tanqiq eslequq \'91the moon became full\'92; gaaghusiq esleqaqa \'91I filled the pot\'92	moon (become full (of the ~))												to fill up full ; to become full (of the moon)		PE cil0!-\super 2				\nosupersub esleqe-	esleqe-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
esleqnga-	scks23]f-	full (be ~)		esleqngaaq \'91it is full\'92 / tanqiq esleqngaaq \'91the moon is full	moon (be full (of the ~))												to be full; to be full (of the moon)		< esleqe-nga-		VK\'92s notes		esleqnga-	esleqnga-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \u1187 \u1100 \u1072 -\
eslequq	sck]s2e2	flipper, rear, of seal or walrus		ayveghem esleqghwi \'91walrus flippers\'92													rear flipper of seal or walrus		< ?-quq				eslequq	eslequq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
eslevagaq	sck]sdfuf2	dish of fish eggs and seal oil whipped together															dish of fish eggs and seal oil whipped together		< eslevag-ghaq				eslevagaq	eslevagaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
eslevak	sck]sdfr	roe		eslevaget \'91fish eggs\'92; 
\f2\i other Eskimo languages also use the word for \'91fish eggs\'92 as a term for \'91vagina\'92 	
\f0\i0 fish egg	vagina											roe; fish egg; vagina		PE ci@uva!			; > eslevagaq	eslevak	eslevak	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
esliga-	sck]buf-	awkward		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0   esliganaghtuq \'91it makes one feel awkward or out of place\'92; esligayagutuq \'91he has come to feel awkward or out of place\'92; esligayugtuq \'91he feels awkward or out of place\'92; aatkani esligayagutii \'91he came to feel awkward about his clothes\'92; esligayugluni qavaghyaghtullghitughnguq \'91feeling awkward he did not go over to sleep there, it is said\'92	out of place												awkward; out of place				A& W 21		esliga-	esliga-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 -\
eslugh-	sck]/4-	south (go ~)		eslughtuq \'91he is going south\'92  / esluutaa \'91he took it south with him\'92	travel with the wind												to go south; to travel with the wind		PY cilu3-				eslugh-	eslugh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\

\f1\b esna\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub scy]f\super s	\nosupersub border		naayvam esnengani \'91on the shore of the lake\'92; meghem esnengani \'91on the shore of the sea\'92; 
\f2\i used possessed, for use unpossessed see 
\f0\i0 esnaq	edge	shore											border; edge; shore		PE cin0			esneghaq, esneghruk, esneli-, esnighqwagh-, esnighte-	esnae	esnae	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1099 \
esnaghtaq	scy]f5nf2	rock, round and smooth, found on beach															round smooth rock found on beach		< esnaq-taq\super 2				\nosupersub esnaghtaq	esnaghtaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
esnaq	scy]f2	shore		esnami \'91on the shore\'92; esnameng \'91from the shore\'92; esnakun \'91to the shore\'92; 
\f2\i used unpossessed, for use with possessor see
\f0\i0  esna\super e								\nosupersub  					shore		PE cina\super e				\nosupersub esnaq	esnaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \
Esneghak	Scy]s4fr	Niyrakpak Lagoon, channel to ocean on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 channel connecting Niyrakpak (Naayvaghpak) Lagoon to ocean on St. Larence Is.		< esneghaq-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 Esneghak	Esneghak	\uc0\u1067 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1082 \
Esneghak 	Scy]s4fr	lagoon near Nasqaq on St. Lawrence Island															lagoon near Nasqaq on St. Lawrence Island		< esneghaq-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 Esneghak 	Esneghak 	\uc0\u1067 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1082 \
esneghaq	scy]s4f2	lagoon opening to the sea		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  esneghak, 
\f2\i for one lagoon													
\f0\i0 lagoon opening to the sea		< esna-ghaq				esneghaq	esneghaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
esneghruk	scys4her	edge (the very ~)															the very edge		< esna-ghruk				esneghruk	esneghruk	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
esnegrakegte-	scy]suhfrs[ns-	dark (be very ~ in color)															to be very dark in color		< esnek-rakegte-		SLI JR. DICT. 49		esnegrakegte-	esnegrakegte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
esnegrukegtaq	scy]suhers[nf2	red (something vividly dark ~)			purple (something ~)												something vividly dark red; something purplish		< esnek-ghruk-kegtaq				esnegrukegtaq	esnegrukegtaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
esnek	scy]sr	bruise															bruise		PY-S cin0k			> esnigh-, esnegrukegtaq, esneyaaq	esnek	esnek	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \
esnekegtaq	cysrs[nf2	reindeer skin		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 skin (reindeer ~)								check				reindeer skin	hjdleuf			CK V & E 92; Rub 451		esnekegtaq	esnekegtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
esnelaaghun	scysk64ey	trimming															trimming		< esna-?-(u)n		CK Nagai CK		esnelaghun	esnelxghun	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
esneli-	scy]skb-	prepare edge of walrus skin for splitting		esneliiq \'91she is preparing the edge of a skin\'92; esnelii \'91she is preparing the edge of it\'92 /													to prepare edge of walrus skin for splitting		< esna-li-				esneli-	esneli-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 -\
esnevagh-	scy]sdf4-	approach the coast from the  sea															to approach the coast from the sea	ghb,kb;fncz r ,thtue c vjhz	< esna\super e\nosupersub -vagh-		CK V & E 160 CK		esnevagh-	esnevagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
esneyaaq	scy]s92	purplish thing															purplish thing		< esnek-?				esneyaq	esneyxq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
esni-	scy]b-	prepare edge of walrus skin for splitting		esniiq \'91she is preparing the edge of a skin\'92; esnii \'91she is preparing the edge of it\'92 /													to prepare edge of walrus skin for splitting		< esna-li-				esni-	esni-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 -\
esnigh-	scy]b4-	bruise		esnightuq \'91he got bruised\'92; esnighaa \'91he bruised her, it\'92 /													to bruise		< esnek-ligh-				esnigh-	esnigh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
esnighagh-	scy]b4f4-	squirt		meghtaghvigem maaqviga qelpeghhlleghhiini meghmeng esnighaghaquq \'91when opening the pumphouse faucet, it regularly squirts water\'92	flow out forcefully								check; explained as: maaqelghii tekaghreketiighmeng, which VK translates as \'91squirting\'92				to squirt; to flow out forcefully				A&W 21		esnighagh-	esnighagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
esnighqwagh-	scy]b521f4-	beachcomb															to beachcomb		< esnighte-?				esnighqwagh-	esnighqwagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
esnighte-	scy]b5ns-	go along the shore		esnightuq \'91he is going along the shore\'92; esnightaa \'91he is going along it\'92 / taaghtam esnighsimi guygut aqnightelget \'91the doctor went around to the houses with people that had medical conditions\'92	beachcomb	walk around											to go along the shore; to beachcomb; to walk around		< esna-?-		gloss 3: CK Rub 451		esnighte-	esnighte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
espagna	scgfuyf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  paagna																			espagna	espagna	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
espamna	scgfvyf			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0  paamna																			espamna	espamna	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1087 \u1072 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
espikna	scgbry]f			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 piikna																			espikna	espikna	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \
esqagna	sc2fuyf			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 qaagna																			esqagna	esqagna	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
esqakemna	sc2frsvyf			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 qakemna																			esqakemna	esqakemna	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
esqamna	sc2fvyf			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0  qaamna																			esqamna	esqamna	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
esqawna	sc2f1yf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  qaawna																			esqawna	esqawna	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u1085 \u1072 \
esquughqe-	sc2852s-	mosquito bites (be covered with ~)											???, simple example?				to be covered with mosquito bites						esqughqe-	esqxghqe-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
estaaghagh-	scn64f4-	slide down repeatedly		Meteghllugllagnguq taana 
\f2\i estaaghaamalghii
\f0\i0 . \'91That big raven, they say, 
\f2\i was sliding down repeatedly
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:5)													to slide down repeatedly		< estu-?-			; > estaaghaghvigek	estaghagh-	estxghagh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
estaaghaghvigek	scn64f4dbusr	slide (children's ~)															children's slide		< estaaghagh-vik-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 estaghaghvigek	estxghaghvigek	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1099 \u1082 \
estamagneq	scnfvfuys2	four things or groups		
\f2\i used with a plural ending and therefore realized as 
\f0\i0 estamagneghet, estamagneghneng, 
\f2\i etc.; used to indicate four things, when the noun for that thing is used in  the plural or dual even for a single entitity, or to indicate four groups (such as families), thus: 
\f0\i0 Isiqaghlleghhangunaamta tamlaghqutkakut, 
\f2\i estamagneghni
\f0\i0  angyani. \'91Without splashing we landed in 
\f2\i four
\f0\i0  boats.\'92 (PANGEGH. 24; 
\f2\i note that plural, 
\f0\i0 angyat, 
\f2\i is used for a single
\f0\i0  \'91boat and crew\'92)													four things; four groups		< estama(t)-gneq				estamagneq	estamagneq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Estamallgha aghneq	Scnfvfk]5f f4ys2	Wednesday		
\f2\i so called because Wednesday is the fourth day of the week													
\f0\i0 Wednesday		< estamat + agneq			xxxa	Estamallgha aghneq	Estamallgha aghneq	\uc0\u1067 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1072  \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
estamaneng inglulek	
\fs20 scnfvfys3 b3k/ksr	
\fs24 nine															nine		< estamat + inglu			xxxi	estamaneng inglulek	estamaneng inglulek	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187  \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
estamat 	scnfvfn	four		estamaneng  yuuk unangumalghii \'91the man got four (seals)\'92; estamaat \'91the fourth one of them\'92; 
\f2\i the word 
\f0\i0 estamat 
\f2\i is a plural, but the singular, 
\f0\i0 estama, 
\f2\i can also occur as in: 
\f0\i0 Elngaatall utaqiigukut, amsanaghllugllak, 
\f2\i estama
\f0\i0  qavaq. \'91We were waiting a long time as it was very calm [no wind], 
\f2\i four
\f0\i0  days and nights.\'92 (PANGEGH. 14)													four		PE citamat			> Estamallgha aghneq, estaamaneng ingulek	estamat 	estamat 	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \
este-	scns-	leak air (out)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R):
\f0\i0  =
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 elte-	deflate												to leak air (out); to deflate		PE n0l0t- (under PE n0l03(-))			; > eltekeltagh-;	este-	este-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
esteg-	scnsu-	peel off in layers		allighteraaghqek estegtuk \'91his socks slid down\'92; estegtaquq \'91he is peeling off a layer of his clothes\'92; estegtaa \'91he peeled the skin off it\'92; estegsimakek qulliraaghegni ivghaaneghmeng taaqsami \'91he unrolled the legs of his pants after he finished wading\'92; kaviiq taaqsamigu aftaneghmeng estegsimakang \'91when he finished slitting the skin of the fox, he stripped the skin off it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  estek	skin (remove the skin from (it \'96 not carcass))	slide down (of pants, socks, etc.)								delaminate			to delaminate; to peel off in layers; to skin (it \'96 not carcass); to slide down (of pants, socks, etc.)					; esteggaghte-	esteg-	esteg-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 -\
esteggaghte-	scns[f5ns-	blister (get a ~)			scrape off a layer of one\'92s skin												to get a blister; to scrape a layer off a layer of one\'92s skin		< esteg-aghte-				esteggaghte-	esteggaghte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
estegmik	scnsuvbr	knife (big hunting ~ worn on belt)															big hunting knife worn on belt		< estek-mik				estegmik	estegmik	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
Estegragvak	Scmsuhfudfr	former village at the northwest point of Yttygran Is. in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village at the northwest point of Yttygran Is. in Chukotka						Estegragvak	Estegragvak	\uc0\u1067 \u1089 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1075 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
estegtaq	scns[nf2	laver (seaweed)		
\f2\i a seaweed type which is long, brown, ribbon-like and wavy-edged; cf. 
\f0\i0 estek	
\f2\i Porphyra laciniata												
\f0\i0 laver (seaweed) 
\f2\i (Porphyra laciniata)						
\f0\i0 estegtaq	estegtaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
estek	scnsr	pocket		Ilangi qafsinaneng 
\f2\i estelwaaqluteng
\f0\i0 , \'85 \'91Some had several 
\f2\i pockets
\f0\i0 , \'85\'92 (KALLAG. 48); estegmigaa \'91he put it in his pocket\'92; estegmikaa \'91he has it in his pocket\'92; 
\f2\i this is apparently a direct nominalization of 
\f0\i0 esteg-	bunched up thread or fabric (from being pulled an opening)												pocket; bunched up thread or fabric (from being pulled an opening)					; > estegmik	estek	estek	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
esteqaq	scns2f2	muscle															muscle		< esteqe-aq				esteqaq	esteqaq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
esteqe-	scns2s-	persevere		estequq \'91he tensed his muscles, persevered\'92 / estequtaa \'91he endured it\'92; estequsimakanga yugem aleni iqunnaqeghngaatni \'91the man tensed and held on so that the other man wouldn't knock him down\'92	endure	tense muscles and keep them tensed											to persevere; to endure; to tense muscles and keep them tensed					; > esteqaq	esteqe-	esteqe-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b estiima\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub scn7vf\super s	\nosupersub steam		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 steamboat	cutter (boat)											steam; steamboat; cutter		from English \'91steam\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R453)		
\f0\i0 estimae	estxmae	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1251 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
estiimaraq	scn7vfhf2	cutter (boat)		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 steamboat												steamboat; cutter		from English \'91steamer\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R453)		
\f0\i0 estimaraq	estxmaraq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1251 \u1084 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
estu- 	scne-	slide		Eng, 
\f2\i estu
\f0\i0 , sayugnaangitamken meghmun aatqaghtekuvek! \'91Well then, 
\f2\i slide
\f0\i0 , (however) I won\'92t pull you out if you plunge down into the water!\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:6)													to slide		PE citu-			> estaaghagh-, estullugneq	estu- 	estu- 	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 -\
estugaq*	scneuf2	store		estugaghmi qepghaghaquq \'91he works at the store\'92													store		from English \'91store\'92	SLI			estugaq*	estugaq*	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
estugem sigutanga	scneusv cbuenf3f	hangnail		
\f2\i literally: 
\f0\i0 'nail's ear'													hangnail		< estuk-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + sigun-
\f2\i possessed; there is a cognate idiomatic phrase for this in Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik			
\f0\i0 xxxs	estugem sigutanga	estugem sigutanga	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1084  \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \
estuget	scnehsn	ice creeper		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91finger (or toe) nails\'92	creeper (ice ~)								listed as \'93horseshoes\'94; could the horseshoes be snowshoes?				ice creeper		< estuk-
\f2\i plural		
\f0\i0 CK Rub 453		estuget	estuget	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1088 \u1099 \u1090 \
estugh-	scne4-	stretching one's legs		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0 estughtuq \'91he stretched his legs\'92; estughtaa \'91he stretched its leg out\'92; estughngaaq \'91he has his legs stretched out, it has had its legs stretched out\'92													with legs stretched out		PE cittu3-				estugh-	estugh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
estugigh-	scneub4-	trim one\'92s nails		estugightuq \'91he is trimming his (own) nails\'92; estugighaa \'91he is trimming his (another\'92s) nails\'92 /													to trim one\'92s nails		< estuk-(ng)igh-				estugigh-	estugigh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
estugiisiq	scneu7cb2	nail clippers or trimmers		
\f2\i dual, 
\f0\i0 estugiisik
\f2\i , used for one pair													
\f0\i0 nail clippers or trimmers		< estugigh-(u)siq				estugisiq	estugxsiq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
estugkaaq	scne[r62	twig		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 branch												twig; branch	dtnrf	< estuk-?		CK Rub 453		estugkaq	estugkxq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1093 \u1082 \u257 \u1179 \
estugmig-	scneuvbu-	scratch with fingernails		estugmigtuq \'91he scratched himself\'92; estugmigaa \'91he scratched her or it\'92 /	protect using the claws 	beat with hoofs											to scratch with fingernails; to protect using the claws; to beat with hoofs		PY citu!mi!- (under PY-S cituk); < estuk-mig-		CK V & E 185 and Rub 453 2nd gloss		estugmig-	estugmig-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
estuk	scner	fingernail			toenail	claw								hoof			fingernail; toenail; claw; hoof		PY-S cituk		gloss 3, 4: CK Rub 453	> estugem sigutnga, estugmig-	estuk	estuk	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \
estulgha-	scnek4f-	go forward fast especially when sliding downward		qamiyek qiighnam estulghanapigtuk leganqun estulghameng igleghtunga \'91on account of the slipperiness, the sled went very fast and  I traveled as if sliding down fast forward\'92; ilagalghiim ilagaatni estulghastaa \'91the singer let it come out in their (other\'92s) songs\'92 
\f2\i (figurative use)	
\f0\i0 slide downward								check, explained as: estulghiistun sukeralghii, which VK translates as \'91going forward fast like sliding down\'92				to go forward fast especially when sliding downward		< estu-?-		A&W 22		estulgha-	estulgha-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 -\
estullugneq	scnek]/uys2	knot at end of rope to keep it from slipping through hole															knot at end of rope to keep it from slipping through hole		< estu-llugte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub estullugneq	estullugneq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
estullugte-	scnek]/[ns-	tie knot at the end of a rope to keep it from slipping out of something		uyiighem iqugi estullugtekat satemnayukata \'91a knot is usually tied at the ends of a rawhide rope to keep the rope from slipping\'92; tapghaam iquga estulluggnaken \'91(you) tie the end of the rope\'92									check; explained as: qilleghneghet satemngiitat, which VK translates as above				to tie knot at the end of a rope to keep it from slipping out of something				A&W 22		estullugte-	estullugte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
estullugtelleq	scnek]/[nsk]s2	knot at end of rope to keep it from slipping through hole															knot at end of rope to keep it from slipping through hole		< estu-llugte-lleq				estullugtelleq	estullugtelleq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
estulluk	scnek]/r	boot (skin ~ made from reindeer leg)			skin-boot made from reindeer leg												skin-boot made from reindeer leg		< estuk-lluk				estulluk	estulluk	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
estulluyaaq	scnek]/92	child\'92s skin-boot			skin-boot, child\'92s												child\'92s skin-boot		< estulluk-yaaq				estulluyaq	estulluyxq	\uc0\u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
ete-	sns-	be		
\f2\i obsolete base, found in forms such as 
\f0\i0 angyametuq \'91it is in the boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  *angyami etuq), yugem angyaanituq \'91it is in the man\'92s boat\'92 (from
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 yugem anyaani etuq); whaantuq \'91it is here\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  *whani etuq); iggagmetuq \'91it is leaning\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  * iggagmi etuq); ellngitnituq \'91he is with or among them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  *ellngitni etuq); ellnginaghmetuten \'91you are alone\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ellnginaghmete- \'91to be alone\'92, 
\f2\i but note that this truly has become lexicalized; one would not have said
\f0\i0  *ellnginaghmi etuten, 
\f2\i but only
\f0\i0  *ellnginaghpek etuten)													to be		PE 0t-				ete-	ete-	\uc0\u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
evelegtagh- 	sdsks[nf4-	vibrate		= uvelegtagh-	bounce								simple examples?				to vibrate; to bounce		PE 0v0(3)l0!-				evelegtagh- 	evelegtagh- 	\uc0\u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
evlawa	sdkz1f	flour		= avlawa; 
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 flour		from English \'91flour\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (V&E49, R123)		
\f0\i0 evlawa	evlawa	\uc0\u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1103 \u1265 \u1072 \
evlegh-	sdks4-	shimmer		evleqegtaq \'91glittery thing\'92; = qavlegh-, qelmegh-, uvlegh-	glitter	shiny (be ~)											to shimmer; to glitter; to be shiny		PE q0vl03-				evlegh-	evlegh-	\uc0\u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
evleq	sdks2	sheen		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qavlegh-, qelmegh-, uvlegh-	gloss	luster											sheen; gloss; luster		PE q0vl03-			> evleqeghte-; 	evleq	evleq	\uc0\u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
evleqegte-	sdks2s[ns-	shiny (be ~)		< evleq-kegte-									simple example(s) ?				to be shiny						evleqegte-	evleqegte-	\uc0\u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
evluk	sdk/r	swell (sea ~)		= uveluk; evluget taangani aangepigtut \'91he swell are very big out there\'92; niinghutaghalghiim evlugan repall kaatiinkut \'91the sea swell(s) of the one plunging around reached us with impact\'92	wave (ocean ~)												sea swell; ocean wave		PE i&(0)yul0!		A&W 22 (for examples)		evluk	evluk	\uc0\u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \
evzi	sdpb	limp thing(s)		evzit qungangitnun iighumalghiit \'91they hid between the things that had collapsed together\'92; evzingwaaghughsimalghii qavam \'91he felt limp on account of sleep\'92	collapsed together thing(s)								check, explained as: sangwaat uniilliighaqat, which VK translates as \'91something that went limp, things that have been loosely bunched together\'92				limp thing(s); thing(s) that have collapsed together				A&W 22		evzi	evzi	\uc0\u1099 \u1074 \u1079 \u1080 \
gaagh-	u64-	cook		gaaghtuq \'91he cooked\'92; gaaghaa \'91he cooked it\'92 /gaaghutaa \'91she cooked for him\'92													to cook		PE 0!a-			gaaghaq, gaaghta, gaaghusik, gaaghusiq	gagh-	gxgh-	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1271 -\
gaaghaq	u64f2	cooked (something that has been ~)															something that has been cooked		PE 0!a(C)a3 (under PE 0!a-); < gaagh-aq				gaghaq	gxghaq	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
gaaghta	u65nf	cook			chef												cook; chef	gjdfh	< gaagh-(s)ta		CK V & E 100  (Russian vocab)		gaghta	gxghta	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
gaaghusiq	u64ecb2	cooking pot or other device		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  gaaghusik, 
\f2\i for one stove or cooking device	
\f0\i0 pot, cooking	stove											cooking pot; stove; cooking device		< gaagh-(u)siq				gaghusiq	gxghusiq	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
gaaleq	u6ks2 	net (small ~ to catch seals)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check whether used on SLI				small net to catch seals	vfktymrfz ctnm yf ythg.			Rub. 127		galeq	gxleq	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
gaaqaq	u62f2	cooked (something that has been ~)															something that has been cooked		< gaagh-(g)kaq				gaqaq	gxqaq	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
gaarineq	u6hbys2	gun powder			ash												gun powder; ash	gjhj[\\ pjkf. gtgtk			... gloss 3 CK V & E 82; Rub 127		garineq	gxrineq	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1088 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
gagsawi-	uf[cz1b-	hurry (be in a ~)															to be in a hurry	njhjgbbcz	from Chukchi !a!caw- \'91hurry\'92				gagsawi-	gagsawi-	\uc0\u1075 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1265 \u1080 -\
gakangqa	ufrf32f	puller (draft animal)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 puller (draft animal)		from Chukchi !ara&qor \'91leader reindeer pulling sled\'92		CK Rub 126		gakangqa	gakangqa	\uc0\u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \
gaymaangi 	ufqv63b	extravagantly		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle; exact meaning undertermined; Gaymaangi
\f0\i0  nuliighhighnaqaqa. \'91I\'92m going to take his wife 
\f2\i anyway
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 43)	despite anything	anyway							???				extravagantly; despite anything; anyway		from Chukchi !ayma&en \'91certainly, undoubtedly, be able, can\'92			; > gaymaangitke-	gaymangi 	gaymxngi 	\uc0\u1075 \u1072 \u1253 \u1084 \u257 \u1187 \u1080 \
gaymaangike-	ufqv63b2s-	able (be ~ to do something) (?)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exact meaning undertermined									
\f0\i0 check length of second vowel; cf. gaymaangitke- \'91to probably continue despite obstacles\'92 (?)				to be able to do something (?)	evtnm ltkfnm xnj-k>	< gaymaa-?-		Rub. 126		gaymangike-	gaymxngike-	\uc0\u1075 \u1072 \u1253 \u1084 \u257 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
gaymaangitke-	ufqv63bnrs-	continue despite anything		
\f2\i exact meaning undertermined	
\f0\i0 use wastefully												to probably be continuing despite anything; to use wastefully		< gaaymangi-(u)tke-				gaymangitke-	gaymxngitke-	\uc0\u1075 \u1072 \u1253 \u1084 \u257 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
gaymaawi-	ufqv61b-	completely engrossed in what one is doing (be ~)		gaymaawiiq \'91he is completely engrossed in his actions\'92 / tengyaghqat atughtet igiighsiitkelluku atuqaghluteng, elngaatall gaymaawiyalghiimeng nagaquumangisimakangit tengekayuget, kaalluteng, enmis aga, unilluteng \'91the singers, who were supposed to fly out, decided to practice awhile, but became so engrossed in their singing that the plane, without their noticing it, had arrived and had already left\'92	use something extravagantly	enjoy life								live in satisfaction			to be completely engrossed in what one is doing; to use something extravagantly; to enjoy life; to live in satisfaction		from Chukchi !aymaw0k \'91be engrossed in\'92	14	CK V & E 152 (3rd & 4th gloss)		gaymawi-	gaymxwi-	\uc0\u1075 \u1072 \u1253 \u1084 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\
gelgaghniigh-	uskuf4y74-	adultery (commit ~)		Nagaquqaqaghsi whaten pilleq, \'93
\f2\i Gelgaghniighpenasi
\f0\i0 .\'94 Iwernga whanga piimsi, kitum alngunak esghaghluku aghnaq qiliiqegkumigu taawa 
\f2\i gelgaghniighuuq
\f0\i0  qamagun ilumikun. \'91\'91You\'92ve heard it said, \'93Don\'92t 
\f2\i commit
\f0\i0  
\f2\i adultery
\f0\i0 .\'94 However  I say to you, that whover looks at a woman lusting after her, is already committing 
\f2\i adultery
\f0\i0  in his heart.\'92 (Matthew 5.27)													to commit adultery		< gelgaq-niigh-		from Shinen\'92s NT translation		gelgaghnigh-	gelgaghnxgh-	\uc0\u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
gelgaq	uskuf2	lover, illicit		
\f2\i also written 
\f0\i0 egelgaq									; 
\f2\i perhaps 
\f0\i0 woman\'92s 
\f2\i only ??				
\f0\i0 illicit lover						gelgaq	gelgaq	\uc0\u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
gerungawae	ushe3f1fs	fly (yellow meat ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan; cf. 
\f0\i0 nguuyngaaghaq \'91housefly\'92	yellow meat fly								used also on SLI?				yellow meat fly		from Chukchi !03\'92o&aw0t \'91fly\'92	06, 14			gerungawae	gerungawae	\uc0\u1075 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1099 \
getgeta	usn[snf	some		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 somehow	barely								holding off			some; somehow; barely; holding off		from Chukchi !0t!0te \'91somehow, anyhow, against one\'92s will\'92		CK gloss 1 from Rub 130, 2,3 from Tanko, 4 from Rosa Irigoo		getgeta	getgeta	\uc0\u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \
geve-	usds-	render oil from fat		gevuq \'91it is losing its oil, it is being compressed\'92 / gevestaa \'91he compressed it\'92; uqut temngi tamaani kiyaghtesleghhiini mesiighi gevaqut \'91when blubber is left laying around the oil seeps out of it\'92; ayumiq aghnat uqut kapeghlluki mesiighi gevesteghllagaqiit sukalluku mesiingnaluteng \'91in the past women would pound on blubber to render the oil from it when they needed oil in a hurry\'92;
\f2\i  cf. 
\f0\i0 ege-	compress	slip one\'92s mind											to render oil from fat; to compress; to slip one\'92s mind		PE 0!0-		the \'93slip one\'92s mind\'94 gloss is from SLI JR. DICT. 50		geve-	geve-	\uc0\u1075 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
gevragh-	usdhf4-	ooze out		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to ooze out	dsltkzncz	< geve-ragh-		CK V & E 41; Rub 130		gevragh-	gevragh-	\uc0\u1075 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ggaagiite-	[6u7ns-	dull (become ~ through long use)		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to become dull through long use	cnfxbdfnm			CK V & E 180, Rub 570		ggagite-	ggxgxte-	\uc0\u1093 \u257 \u1075 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ggaagraketun	[6uhfrsney	rasping sound (with a ~)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 ggaagraketun elngaatall ilagaghtuq \'91she sang in a high-pitched voice\'92	grating sound (with a ~)	high-pitched voice (in a ~)											with a rasping or grating sound; in a high-pitched voice		< ggaak-?-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 ggagraketun	ggxgraketun	\uc0\u1093 \u257 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
ggaak	[6r	rasping sound		ggaaguutuq \'91there is a rasping or grating sound\'92; ggaagmeng nagaquutunga \'91I hear a rasping or grating sound\'92	grating sound	file (hand tool)								rasp			rasping sound; grating sound; file; rasp		PE k0!9a!-				ggak	ggxk	\uc0\u1093 \u257 \u1082 \
ggata	[fnf	upper part of body or garment		ggaatka \'91my torso, my back, my shirt\'92: Uyughaqa kavilnguugneng 
\f2\i ggatengllaghaqa
\f0\i0 . \'91I made my younger sibling a red 
\f2\i shirt
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 52)	torso	back of person								shirt or blouse			upper part of body or garment; torso; back of person; shirt or blouse		PE ki!an				ggata	ggata	\uc0\u1093 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \
ggatek	[fnsr	blouse		gategka \'91my shirt\'92	shirt												blouse; shirt		< ggata-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 ggatek	ggatek	\uc0\u1093 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \

\f1\b ggatemqaaghek
\f5\i  	
\f0\i0\b0 [fnsv264sr	jacket		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 blouse	shirt							used on SLI?				jacket; blouse; shirt		< gata-?-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 ggatemqaghek 	ggatemqxghek 	\uc0\u1093 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1179 \u257 \u1271 \u1099 \u1082 \
ggatmeghruk	[fnv]s4her	shoulder blades (area between ~)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 tatmeghruk													area between shoulder blades		< ggata-?-ruk				ggatmeghruk	ggatmeghruk	\uc0\u1093 \u1072 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
ggayegtaq	[fqs[nf2	whale shoulder blade part used as a lamp support															the part of a whale shoulder blade used as a lamp support		< ggayek-taq\super 1				\nosupersub ggayegtaq	ggayegtaq	\uc0\u1093 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ggayek	[fqsr	shoulder blade		ggaaska \'91my shoulder blade\'92; ggaaygegka \'91my shoulder blades\sub 2\nosupersub \'92; ggaayga \'91his shoulder blade\'92; ggaaskek \'91his shoulder blades\sub 2\nosupersub \'92													shoulder blade		PE ki!ay0!				ggayek	ggayek	\uc0\u1093 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1082 \
gge	[s	signifies approval		
\f2\i interjectional particle													
\f0\i0 signifies approval						gge	gge	\uc0\u1093 \u1099 \
ggii-	[7-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > ggiightenge-, ggiighsi-, ggiilleq, ggiisaqu, ggiiste-																			ggi-	ggx-	\uc0\u1093 \u1251 -\
ggiighsi-	[75cb-	pain from a wound (be in ~)															to be in pain from a wound		PE k0!i3-; < ggii-?-				ggighsi-	ggxghsi-	\uc0\u1093 \u1251 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 -\
ggiightenge-	[75ns3s-	hurt (of wound)		kilillgha ggiightengaquq \'91her wound hurts\'92													to hurt (of wound)		< ggii-?-				ggightenge-	ggxghtenge-	\uc0\u1093 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 -\
ggiilleq	[7k]s2	woody core of edible willow root		Kumaghhneghmeggni taakut uqfigam 
\f2\i ggiillghi
\f0\i0  paneghqughaqiit uglaghinaqepiglluki. \'91For making fire sthey would dry lots of willow 
\f2\i root cores
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:236)	willow root (woody core of edible ~)												woody core of edible willow root		< ggii-lleq				ggilleq	ggxlleq	\uc0\u1093 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
ggiinaghruugte-	[7yf4h8[ns-	sick tired expression (get a ~)		gginaghruugtuq \'91his face has a sick, tired look, he is frowning at someone\'92 / gginaghruugutaa \'91he is frowning at her\'92; = gginaghlluugte-	frown at someone												to get a sick, tired expression; to frown at someone		< gginaq-ruk-?-				gginaghrugte-	ggxnaghrxgte-	\uc0\u1093 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ggiisaqu-	[7cz2e-	clench teeth (keep on clenching one\'92s the teeth (often of a polar bear))		nanuum ggiisaqutaa \'91the polar bear was clenching its teeth toward him\'92													to keep on clenching one\'92s the teeth (often of a polar bear)		< ggii-?-				ggisaqu-	ggxsaqu-	\uc0\u1093 \u1251 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 -\
ggiiste-	[7cns-	clench one's teeth		ggiistuq \'91he (or it) clenched his teeth\'92 / ggiistutaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ggiisutaa \'91he clenched his teeth toward him or on it\'92; taghnughhaam ulumun pakigusiq ggiistutaa \'91the child clenched his teeth on the tongue depressor\'92													to clench one's teeth		PE k0!0-; < ggii-(te)ste-				ggiste-	ggxste-	\uc0\u1093 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
gginaghlluugte-	[byf5k]0[ns-	sick tired expression (get a ~)		gginaghlluugtuq \'91his face has a sick, tired look, he is frowning at someone\'92 / gginaghlluugutaa \'91he is frowning at her\'92; gginaghlluugngaaq salin, qinuyaagulghii \'91her face seems sick and tired because she is not well\'92; = gginaghruugte-	frown at someone												to get a sick, tired expression; to frown at someone		< gginaq-lluk-?-				gginaghllugte-	gginaghllxgte-	\uc0\u1093 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
gginaghsi-	[byf5cb-	know (come to ~ (a person))		gginaghsiit \'91they came to recognize him by his appearance\'92;  yimiksaghluku tagtalmi gginaghsiit \'91after being shy around him at length they got to know him\'92	recognize (come to ~ (a person))												to come to know or recognize (a person)		< gginaq-?-		A&W 23 (examples)		gginaghsi-	gginaghsi-	\uc0\u1093 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 -\
gginaq	[byf2	face			side of hill	edge of knife											face; side of hill; edge of knife		PE k0!ina3			> gginaghlluugte-, gginaqwaaq, gginaghsi-, gginasaghqugh-	gginaq	gginaq	\uc0\u1093 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
gginaqwaaq	[byf2162	mask		Ukiivagmiit 
\f2\i gginaqwaaghluteng
\f0\i0  aghulakayuget. \'91The King Islanders use 
\f2\i masks
\f0\i0  for dancing.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 52)	funny face drawing												mask; funny face drawing		< gginaq-?-				gginaqwaq	gginaqwxq	\uc0\u1093 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
gginasaghqugh-	[byfcz52e4-	look right in the eye		gginasaghqughaa \'91he looked him right in the eye\'92/ enankin gginasaghqughluku aapsaqegka tuunaanga \'91(it was me) after looking him right in the eye, I asked him, and he gave (it) to me\'92; gginasaghquullutungtuq aleghquuullghiikung \'91would that we two could look each other right in the eye and converse\'92	come face to face with												to look right in the eye; to come face to face with		< gginasaghte-qugh-		A&W 23 (examples)		gginasaghqugh-	gginasaghqugh-	\uc0\u1093 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
gginasaghte-	[byfcz5ns-	hit in the face or front		milughluku gginasaghtaa \'91he threw something at him and hit him right in the face\'92; anuqem naayghaq gginasaghtaa \'91the wind is blowing against the face of the mountain\'92													to hit in the face or front		< gginaq-?-		VK		gginasaghte-	gginasaghte-	\uc0\u1093 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
gguta	[enf	tooth		gguutka \'91my tooth\'92; ggutenka \'91my teeth\'92; gguutngi 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ggutangi \'91his teeth\'92													tooth		PE k0!un; < egge-(u)ta			> gguusiqe-, gguutngigh-, gguterugutkaq, gguutniighta	gguta	gguta	\uc0\u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
ggutangigh-	[enf3b4-	lose a tooth (naturally or through extraction) 		ggutangightuq \'91he lost a tooth\'92; ggutangighaa  \'91he pulled her tooth\'92 / = gguutngigh-	extract a tooth												to lose a tooth (naturally or through extraction); to extract a tooth		< gguta-(ng)igh-				ggutangigh-	ggutangigh-	\uc0\u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ggutangighta	[enf3b5nf	dentist															dentist		< ggutangigh-(s)ta				ggutangighta	ggutangighta	\uc0\u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
gguterugutkaq	[ensheuenrf2	something frozen into the ice		ayveq mallu esnemi gguterugutkaq naalkumaa \'91he found a frozen walrus carcass as the shore\'92; 
\f2\i so called because such a thing protrudes like a big tooth													
\f0\i0 something frozen into the ice		< ggute-ruk-(u)n-kaq		A&W 23 (example)		gguterugutkaq	gguterugutkaq	\uc0\u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
gguusiqe-	[8cb2s-	toothache (have a toothache)															to have a toothache		< gguta-liqe-				ggusiqe-	ggxsiqe-	\uc0\u1093 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
gguutngigh-	[8n3]b4-	lose a tooth (naturally or through extraction) 		gguutngightuq \'91he lost a tooth\'92; gguutngighaa \'91he pulled her tooth\'92 / = gguutngigh-	extract a tooth												to lose a tooth (naturally or through extraction); to extract a tooth		< gguta-(ng)igh-				ggutngigh-	ggxtngigh-	\uc0\u1093 \u1263 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
gguutniighta	[8ny]75nf	dentist															dentist		< gguta-niigh-(s)ta				ggutnighta	ggxtnxghta	\uc0\u1093 \u1263 \u1090 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
ghefsigh-	4sacb4-	soak (usually of a sealskin) so as to bleach, remove odor, etc		ghefsightuq \'91it soaked\'92; ghefsighaa \'91he soaked it\'92 / uygaaq ghefsighyaghqaaghsimaaq \'91the bleached sealskin is ready for soaking\'92; ghefsighaq entaqun ghevuq \'91the one that is soaking is probably bleached already\'92															< gheve-sigh-		A&W 23 (examples)		ghefsigh-	ghefsigh-	\uc0\u1271 \u1099 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ghemru-, ghemrug-	4svhe-. 4svheu-	envy another's success in hunting		ghemruuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ghemrugtuq \'91he is envious\'92 /													to envy another's success in hunting						ghemru-, ghemrug-	ghemru-, ghemrug-	\uc0\u1271 \u1099 \u1084 \u1088 \u1091 -, \u1271 \u1099 \u1084 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 -\
gheve-	4sds-	fade		ghevuq \'91it faded\'92, \'91he calmed down\'92, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91the dirt got washed out of it\'92 / ghevigatuq \'91it doesn't fade, is colorfast\'92	discolor	calm down after anger											to fade; to discolor; to calm down after anger; to have the dirt get washed out		PE 030-\super 1			\nosupersub ; > ghefsigh-, ghevraag-	gheve-	gheve-	\uc0\u1271 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
ghevraag-	4sdh6u-	pale (be ~)		esla ghevraagsimaa repall eslallugem \'91so much rain has made the sky pale\'92; gginaa ghevraapigtuq \'91his face is really pale\'92									check, explained as: aghsughnaraak, which VK translates as \'91kind of pale in color\'92				to be pale		< gheve-ghraag- (?)		A&W 23		ghevrag-	ghevrxg-	\uc0\u1271 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u257 \u1075 -\
ghhaa	56	dermatitis		= eghha	dry, flaky, whitish skin patch especially on the face												dermatitis; dry, flaky, whitish skin patch especially on the face						ghha	ghhx	\uc0\u1203 \u257 \
ghhaalgha	56k4f	noise made when one is in a trance as if chattering teeth but with tongue between them															noise made when one is in a trance as if chattering teeth but with tongue between them						ghhalgha	ghhxlgha	\uc0\u1203 \u257 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \
ghhatagh-	5fnf4-	lift off from the surface		
\f2\i said of a bird or plane taking off, scab coming off, paint peeling off, etc.
\f0\i0 ; ghhataghtuq \'91it lifted from the surface\'92 / ghhataghaghtaqa \'91I made it lift of\'92; ghhataghmetngwaaghtut angyat \'91the boat is hydroplaning\'92													to lift off from the surface		PY q03a3- and q03ata3-		CK V & E 177 CK 2nd gloss		ghhatagh-	ghhatagh-	\uc0\u1203 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ghhataghqe-, ghhataghqugh-	5fnf52s-. 5fnf52s-	peel off		ghhataghqaa \'91he peeled it off\'92/ ghhataghqughaa mangtegham eslataan piingha \'91he peeled off the ouside paint of the house\'92 													to peel off		< ghhatagh-?-				ghhataghqe-, ghhataghqugh-	ghhataghqe-, ghhataghqugh-	\uc0\u1203 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -, \u1203 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ghhaveq	5fds2	disk of cartilage on the outer part of the elbow joint			cartilage (disk of ~ on the outer part of the elbow joint)	elbow joint (disk of cartilage on the outer part of the ~)											disk of cartilage on the outer part of the elbow joint						ghhaveq	ghhaveq	\uc0\u1203 \u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \
ghhiigh-	574-	broken in (get ~ (of a new item))		ghhiightuq or ghhiighaa \'91it got broken in\'92 /ghhiighsaghaa \'91he broke it in\'92; ullghitak ghhiighwaaghumaak \'91the snow machine is already well broken in\'92; ghhiighyalghiimek qiighnaghqwaagaak \'91now that it (they2) are broken in (one sees that) it runs well\'92													to get broken in (of a new item)				A& W 23 (examples)		ghhigh-	ghhxgh-	\uc0\u1203 \u1251 \u1271 -\
ghhiighsagh-	575cz4-	break in (machinery, vehicle, etc.)		ghhiighsaghaak ullghitaghraghaagni \'91he broke in his new wheeled/tracked vehicle\'92													to break in (machinery, vehicle, etc.)		< ghhiigh-sagh-		VK		ghhighsagh-	ghhxghsagh-	\uc0\u1203 \u1251 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
ghhiitagh-	57nf4-	pluck		ghhiitaghtuq \'91he plucked a bird\'92; ghhiitaghaa \'91he plucked it\'92 / 													to pluck		PE 03ita3- (under PE 03i-)				ghhitagh-	ghhxtagh-	\uc0\u1203 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ghhukaghaq	5erf4f2	urine pot, small, with handle on side			commode, small												small urine pot with handle on side; small commode		< ghhuta-kaghaq				ghhukaghaq	ghhukaghaq	\uc0\u1203 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ghhuta, ghhwuta	5enf. 51enf	urine tub, old-fashioned, wooden 		
\f2\i used to hold urine which was used for processing skin, washing hair and disinfecting; also dual, 
\f0\i0 ghhutek 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ghhwutek
\f2\i , for one such tub	
\f0\i0 commode												old-fashioned wooden urine tub; commode		PY-S qu3un (under PE qu30-)				ghhuta, ghhwuta	ghhuta, ghhwuta	\uc0\u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 , \u1203 \u1265 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
ghhuu-	58-	freeze (to death)		ghhuuguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ghhuugaa \'91he froze (to death)\'92 / ghhuukaq \'91one that has frozen\'92	die by freezing												to freeze (to death); to die by freezing		PE qi3u-				ghhu-	ghhx-	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 -\
ghhuugh-	584-	inflate		ghhuughtuq \'91it puffed up (e.g. dead animal)\'92; ghhuughaa \'91he inflated it\'92 / ghhuughaq \'91inflated thing\'92													to inflate		PE q03u3-				ghhugh-	ghhxgh-	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 \u1271 -\
ghhuughagh-	584f4-	inhale and exhale forcefully		ghhuughaghtuq \'91he panted\'92 / 	pant												to inhale and exhale forcefully; to pant		< ghhuugh-?-				ghhughagh-	ghhxghagh-	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ghhuughaghte-	584f5ns-	washed away by high water (be ~)		ghhuughaghtuq or ghhuughaghtaa \'91it was washed away\'92 /													to be washed away by high water						ghhughaghte-	ghhxghaghte-	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ghhuughpagtagh-	585gf[nf4-	puff up in various places		ghhuughpagtaghtuq \'91it puffed up in various places\'92	bubble	blister											to puff up in various places; to bubble, to blister		< ghhuugh-ghpak-?-				ghhughpagtagh-	ghhxghpagtagh-	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ghhuughqaq	5852f2	lead (metal)		negaghpaget ghhuuqameng uqigtuqutelget \'91the big net has lead weights\'92													lead (metal)		< ghhuuq-kaq		A&W 24 (examples)		ghhughqaq	ghhxghqaq	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
ghhuuligh-	58kb4-	load (a gun)		ghhuulighaa \'91he loaded it\'92 /													to load (a gun)		< ghhuuq-ligh-				ghhuligh-	ghhxligh-	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ghhuuq	582	bullet			arrow	dart								ammunition			bullet; arrow; dart; ammunition		PE qa39u3-				ghhuq	ghhxq	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 \u1179 \
ghhuute-	58ns-	cold (be ~ (of humans and animals))		ghhuutuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ghhuutaa \'91he is cold\'92 / ghhuutestaa
\f1\b  
\f0\b0 supugem \'91the draft made him cold\'92; Egllugput kayaalistepaglukek 
\f2\i ghhuutiinkut
\f0\i0 . \'91We let our stove get too low and we 
\f2\i were cold
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 54); ghhuutqaghtuq \'91he suddenly felt chilled\'92													to be cold (of humans and animals)		< ghhuu-?-				ghhute-	ghhxte-	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ghhuuyug-	58/u-	chills (feel ~ as from illness)		ghhuuyugtuq \'91he feels chilled\'92 / ghhuuyugtestaa qinuyuum \'91not feeling well is giving him chills\'92													to feel chills as from illness		< ghhuu-yug-			; > ghhuuyugniighsagh-	ghhuyug-	ghhxyug-	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 \u1102 \u1075 -\
ghhuuyugaghte-	58/uf5ns-	chills (have ~ going up and down the spine)															to have chills going up and down the spine		< ghhuuyug-aghte-		VK		ghhuyugaghte-	ghhxyugaghte-	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ghhuuyugniighsagh-	58/uy75cz4-	dress for the cold		ghhuuyugniighsaghtuq \'91he dressed for the cold\'92; ghhuuyugniighsaghaa \'91he dressed her for the cold\'92 /													to dress for the cold		< ghhuuyug-niigh-sagh-				ghhuyugnighsagh-	ghhxyugnxghsagh-	\uc0\u1203 \u1263 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
ghii	47	milt (fish ~)															fish milt		PE 039i				ghi	ghx	\uc0\u1271 \u1251 \
gigik	ububr	exasperation (expression of ~)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle	
\f0\i0 expression of exasperation and/or impatience	impatience (expression of ~)											expression of exasperation and/or impatience						gigik	gigik	\uc0\u1075 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1082 \
giimaq	u7vf2	socket at end of harpoon shaft			harpoon part (socket at end of shaft)												ivory socket at end of harpoon shaft into which fits the piece 
\f2\i (tungik) 
\f0\i0 between the point and the shaft of the harpoon		PE 0!ima3				gimaq	gxmaq	\uc0\u1075 \u1251 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \
giimasaak	u7vfc9r	fish type 		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; \'91white sturgeon\'92 identification may be inaccurate	
\f0\i0 sturgeon (white ~)								correct identification needed				kind of fish, identified as 'white sturgeon'				SLI Cur. Man. 54		gimasak	gxmasxk	\uc0\u1075 \u1251 \u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
giniwan	ubyb1fy	hopeless expectation (expression of ~)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 giniwanllu tagiighllequt whavek \'91she could come here, but of course not, they won\'92t come\'92;
\f2\i  also 
\f0\i0 giniwanllu 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ginawanngam	longing (expression of ~)												expression of hopeless expectation or longing		from Chukchi !iniwen \'91besides, on the contrary\'92				giniwan	giniwan	\uc0\u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \
gitasa	ubnfcz	gunsight front component		
\f2\i Chukotkan									
\f0\i0 used also on SLI?				front gunsight		from Chukchi !itec\'920n \'91front sight\'92	14			gitasa	gitasa	\uc0\u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \
gu-gu-gu-gu-guy	ue-ue-ue-ue-ueq			= wu-hu-hu-hu-huu													a call to the master of the heavens				CK Rub 128		gu-gu-gu-gu-guy	gu-gu-gu-gu-guy	\uc0\u1075 \u1091 -\u1075 \u1091 -\u1075 \u1091 -\u1075 \u1091 -\u1075 \u1091 \u1253 \
guguk	ueuer	start!		
\f2\i exclamatory particle;
\f0\i0  = uuhuk	go!												start!; go!						guguk	guguk	\uc0\u1075 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1082 \
guq 	ue2	yes		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle													
\f0\i0 yes						guq 	guq 	\uc0\u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \
guugh-	u84-	bend forward with head down		
\f2\i postural root:
\f0\i0  guughtuq \'91he is bending over forward\'92; guughtaa \'91he bent it forward\'92 / guughngaaq \'91he is bent over forward; guughtestaa \'91he made him bend over forward\'92; 
\f2\i Guughllunga
\f0\i0  analghwaaghet tunutangitni ingaghhneghsighaqa uugta. \'91I 
\f2\i stooped down
\f0\i0  behind a small pile of ice and waited until the seal went back to sleep.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 51)													bent forward with head down						gugh-	gxgh-	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1271 -\
guughqe-	u852s-	bend over forward putting the head down															to bend over forward putting the head down		< guugh-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				gughqe-	gxghqe-	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
guughqe-	u852s-	bend over forward		guughtuq \'91he bent over forward\'92; guughtaa \'91he bent her over forward\'92 / guughqestaa \'91he made her bend over forward\'92													to bend over forward				VK		gughqe-	gxghqe-	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
guughte-	u85ns-	bend one\'92s head down		guughtuq \'91he bent his (own) head down\'92; guughtaa \'91he bent his (another\'92s) head down\'92 / guughtestaa \'91he made her bend her head down\'92													to bend one\'92s head down				VK		gughte-	gxghte-	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
guulgun	u8kuey	crosspiece in roof of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i this crosspiece is supported by an internal pole 
\f0\i0 (ayagun) 
\f2\i and supporting roof poles 
\f0\i0 (ighuluq); = nuulgun													crosspiece in roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		from Chukchi ?	x	p. 85 of Lore of SLI v. 1		gulgun	gxlgun	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
guullaataqu-	u8k]9nf2e-	shoot very well		guullaataquuq \'91he shot well\'92; guullaataqwaa \'91he shot it accurately\'92 /	catch lots of seals	dance very well											to shoot very well; to catch lots of seals; to dance very well		< guute-?-				gullataqu-	gxllxtaqu-	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
guunaq	u8yf2	nut, edible		
\f2\i Chukotkan									
\f0\i0 used also on SLI?				edible nut		from Chukchi wonal!0n, pl. wunet \'91cedar cone, nut\'92	14			gunaq	gxnaq	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
guunniigh-	u8y]74-	shoot at game		guunniightuq \'91he shot at game\'92; guuniighaa \'91he picked a fight with him\'92 / Mekelghiighek esghaghagka savigmeng 
\f2\i guunniighusiqlutek
\f0\i0  pillugullghiik.\'92 I saw two boys fighting, 
\f2\i trying to strike 
\f0\i0 each other with a knife.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 51)	pick a fight with												to shoot at game; to pick a fight with		< guute-niigh-			; > guunniighnaqe-, guunniighun	gunnigh-	gxnnxgh-	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
guunniighnaqe-	u8y]74yf2s-	go out to hunt		guunniighnaquq \'91he went hunting \'91, \'91he went to pick a fight\'92	go out to pick a fight												to go out to hunt; to go out to pick a fight		< guunniigh-naqe-				gunnighnaqe-	gxnnxghnaqe-	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
guunniighun	u8y]74ey	weapon		= guunniighusiq													weapon		< guunniigh-(u)n				gunnighun	gxnnxghun	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
guunniighusiq	u8y]74ecb2	weapon		= guunniighun													weapon		< guunniigh-(u)siq				gunnighusiq	gxnnxghusiq	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
guusagh-	u8cz4-	misfire		guusaghtuq \'91it misfired\'92; guusaghaa \'91he tried to shoot with it but failed\'92 /	fail to shoot												to misfire; to fail to shoot		< guute-yagh\super 2\nosupersub -				gusagh-	gxsagh-	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
guusaghqaq	u8cz52f2	explosive			thing to shoot												explosive; thing to shoot		< guute-yaghqaq				gusaghqaq	gxsaghqaq	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
guute-	u8ns-	shoot		guutuq \'91he shot\'92; guutaa \'91he shot it\'92 / guunnaq \'91something desirable to shoot\'92; elngaatall guututut atughllagluteng \'91they really danced hard to the Yupik singing\'92	dance or otherwise act vigorously	start (engine)											to shoot; to dance or otherwise act vigorously; to start (engine)		PE 0!ut-		the gloss \'93start a motor\'94 is from SLI JR. DICT. 51	; > guullaataqu-, guunniigh-, guusagh-, guuteste-, guutun	gute-	gxte-	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
guuteste-	u8nscns-	start (engine)		guutestaa \'91he started it\'92 /													to start (engine)		< guute-(te)ste-				guteste-	gxteste-	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
guutun	u8ney	weapon		sangwaangam guututngunaqlaataghta? \'91what are we going to have for our income?\'92	income												weapon; income		< guute-n				gutun	gxtun	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
guygu	ueque	summer house		
\f2\i this word is used now for apartment houses and the like in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 building, modern, frame	house (summer ~)											summer house; modern frame building		from Chukchi !uy!un, wuywun \'91cottage, hut\'92	14			guygu	guygu	\uc0\u1075 \u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \
guygungwaaq	ueque3162	house, small			cabin												small house; cabin	ifkfi. gfkfnrf\\ ljvbr	< guygu-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK V & E 81		guygungwaq	guygungwxq	\uc0\u1075 \u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
haam	u6v	enough!		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Sangwaa sumeghmikelleghpigaan sivukluku pinaaghan. 
\f2\i Haam
\f0\i0  taawa ungipaatamken. \'91Whatever you thought of most, you will accomplish first. 
\f2\i Enough
\f0\i0 , I have now told you.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:29); = ahaam	that's enough	all right								so be it			enough!; that's enough; all right; so be it		from Chukchi ?	x			ham	hxm	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1084 \
haamangam	u6vf3fv	enough!		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  = haamangamngam	that\'92s enough	all right								so be it			enough!; that's enough; all right; so be it		<  haam-?=ngam 				hamangam	hxmangam	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
haanta	u6ynf	all-terrain vehicle		
\f2\i base is 
\f0\i0 haanta-; haantat \'91all-terrain vehicles\'92	ATV												all-terrain vehicle (ATV)		from English (and Japanese) brandname \'91Honda\'94				hanta	hxnta	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \

\f1\b haatwara\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub u6n1fhf\super s	\nosupersub hot water		= aatwara													hot water		from English \'91hot water\'92	SLI			hatwarae	hxtwarae	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1090 \u1265 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1099 \
haaw 	u61	anyone there?		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 = ahaaw													is anyone there?		from Chukchi ?	x			haw 	hxw 	\uc0\u1075 \u257 \u1265 \
hay 	ufq	what did you say?		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 = ay	huh?												what did you say?; huh?		PE ay				hay 	hay 	\uc0\u1075 \u1072 \u1253 \
heng	us3	now		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  Seghleghhalek qenwatlu mengyaghnaqiinkut-aa, 
\f2\i heng
\f0\i0  elngaatall araghtek. \'91Oh great! We are finally going to be spooked, 
\f2\i now
\f0\i0  yell all you can.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:170); Anipam meteghlluk pimakanga, "
\f2\i Heng
\f0\i0 , elpegngam.""Aa-a", meteghlluk aangghumalghii.\'94 \'91Owl said to raven, \'93
\f2\i and next
\f0\i0 , it\'92s your turn.\'94 \'93Yes\'94, agreed raven.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:222); = eng	next												now; next						heng	heng	\uc0\u1075 \u1099 \u1187 \
Hotel	ujnsk	Myghapowit Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is. (site at cliffs on the southeast side of ~)															site at cliffs on the southeast side of Myghapowit Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is. 						Hotel	Hotel	\uc0\u1075 \u1086 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \
huk	uer	oops!		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 = uuk	watch out!	oh dear!											oops!; watch out!; oh dear!						huk	huk	\uc0\u1075 \u1091 \u1082 \

\f1\b huusa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub u8cz\super s	\nosupersub hose		= uusa\super e													\nosupersub hose		from English \'91hose\'92	SLI			husae	hxsae	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1099 \
huuy 	u8q	what did you say?		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 anyone there?								used also on SLI?				what did you say?; anyone there?						huy 	hxy 	\uc0\u1075 \u1263 \u1253 \
i	b	oops!		
\f2\i exclamatory particle													
\f0\i0 oops!				VK		i	i	\uc0\u1080 \
i-ik	b-br	expression of surprise or annoyance		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exclamatory particle	
\f0\i0 surpirse (expression of ~)	annoyance (expression of ~)											expression of surprise or annoyance				CK Rub 149		i-ik	i-ik	\uc0\u1080 -\u1080 \u1082 \
ifkaasiq	bar6cb2	parachute															parachute		< ifkagh-(u)siq		VK		ifkasiq	ifkxsiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1092 \u1082 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ifkagh-	barf4-	fall from height		ifkaghtuq \'91he or it fell\'92; ifkaghaa \'91he dropped it (accidentally)\'92/													to fall from height; to drop (accidentally)		PE 090vka3-			ifkaghte-	ifkagh-	ifkagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ifkaghte-	barf5ns-	drop (accidentally or intentionally)		ifkaghtaa \'91he dropped it, made it fall (accidentally or intentionally), killed it\'92; ifkaghqughtuq \'91he is letting things fall\'92	kill												to drop (accidentally or intentionally); to kill		< ifkagh-te\super 1\nosupersub -				ifkaghte-	ifkaghte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ifla-	bak]z-	lose		iflaaq \'91he or it got lost\'92; iflaa \'91he lost it\'92 / ifliiguq \'91he lost something\'92; aghnam saghyani iflii \'91the woman lost her belongings\'92; net ifliiguq \'91the household lost a member (through death)\'92; Taananguq yuuk 
\f2\i iflamaaq
\f0\i0  ighivgaq. \'91That person 
\f2\i passed away
\f0\i0  last night.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 55)	get lost	die											to lose; to get lost; to die		PE 0pla-				ifla-	ifla-	\uc0\u1080 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 -\
iflaaghwagh-	bak]941f4-	lose consciousness		iflaaghwaghtuq \'91he lost consciousness\'92, \'91he was incoherent\'92, \'91he was in a daze\'92 /	faint	daze (be in a ~)								incoherent (be ~)			to lose consciousness; to faint; to feel faint; to pass out; to be incoherent; to be in a daze		< ifla-?-				iflaghwagh-	iflxghwagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iflii-	bak]7-	lose something		ifliiguq \'91he lost something\'92 / net ifliigut \'91the household has lost something\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91the household has lost a loved one through death\'92	suffer a loss through someone\'92s death												to lose something; to suffer a loss through someone\'92s death		< ifla-i\super 1\nosupersub -				ifli-	iflx-	\uc0\u1080 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 -\
igaasiq	bu6cb2	pencil			pen	writing device											pencil; pen; writing device	rfhfylfi\\ gthj	< igagh-(u)siq				igasiq	igxsiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
igagh-	buf4-	design (make a ~)		igaghtuq \'91he wrote, applied a tattoo, made a design, went to school\'92; igaghaa \'91he wrote on it, made a design on it, applied a tattoo to him\'92 / igaataa \'91she wrote for him\'92; igallgituq \'91he can't write well\'92; = iyagh-	write	tattoo (apply a ~)								school (go to ~)			to make a design; to write; to apply a tattoo; to go to school		PE i!a3(-)				igagh-	igagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
igaghneq	buf4ys2	socket at end of harpoon shaft		
\f2\i Chukotka (R)													
\f0\i0 socket at end of harpoon shaft				CK Rub 136		igaghneq	igaghneq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
igaghqwaaq	buf52162	paper (scratch ~, or piece of ~)															scratch paper; piece of paper		< igagh-?-				igaghqwaq	igaghqwxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
igaghraak	buf4h6r	granite or similar spotted rock															granite or similar spotted rock	wdtnyjq rfvtym	< igaq-raak				igaghrak	igaghrxk	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
igaghta	buf5nf	writer			teacher												writer; teacher	exbntkm	< igagh-(s)ta		CK V & E 100; CK; Rub 140		igaghta	igaghta	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
igaghute-	bub4ens-	come to an agreement with someone		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R
\f0\i0 )	agreement (come to an ~ with someone)								check				to come to an agreement with someone	ljujdjhbnmcz c rtv-kb,j			Rub. 140		igaghute-	igaghute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
igaghvik	buf4dbr	school			writing place	college											school; writing place; college		< igagh-vik				igaghvik	igaghvik	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
igaghwaagh-	buf4164-	scribble		igaghwaaghtuq \'91he scribbled\'92; igaghwaaghaa \'91he scribbled on it\'92 /													to scribble		< igagh-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 2\nosupersub -				igaghwagh-	igaghwxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
igaghyagh-	buf4mz4-	school (go to ~)		igaghyaghtuq \'91he went to school\'92 / igaghyaataa \'91he took it to school\'92	go to school												to go to school		< igagh-yagh\super 1\nosupersub -				igaghyagh-	igaghyagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
igaghyaghqaq	buf4mz52f2	paper (writing ~)			writing paper												writing paper		< igagh-yaghqaq				igaghyaghqaq	igaghyaghqaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
igaghyaghta	buf4mz5nf	pupil			student												pupil; student		< igaghyagh-(s)ta				igaghyaghta	igaghyaghta	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
igaghyaq	buf4mz2	pupil; student		Neghestim kingunganeng 
\f2\i igaghyat
\f0\i0  nuugllequnnguq whavek igaghvigraghaghmun. \'91After Thanksgiving the 
\f2\i students
\f0\i0  will move here into the new school.\'92 (SULUWET 5)													pupil; student		
\f2\i this noun is a direct nominalization of
\f0\i0  igaghyagh- \'91to go to school\'92				igaghyaq	igaghyaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
igalghutaq	bufk4enf2	paper container			briefcase	filing cabinet								bookshelf or bookcase			container for paper; briefcase; filing cabinet; bookshelf or bookcase		< igagh-lghutaq				igalghutaq	igalghutaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
igalnga-	bufk3f-	utilizing an unexpected opportunity or inviting situation		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  igalngayugtuq \'91he\'92s utilizing an opportunity\'92; igalngakaa \'91he\'92s utilizing it (opportunity)\'92; igalnganaghtuq \'91it is affording an opportunity\'92; Sivungaghqaannaqelghiit igalngakanka igleghalgukaghaat \'91I\'92ve taken the opportunity to follow those traveling going to Savoonga\'92; igalnganak meghek maligtagket angyat \'91the boats are following in the path of the inviting open ocean water\'92	opportunity (utilizing an unexpected ~ or inviting situation)								check, explained as: maligsugnaq, atuqsugnaq, which VK translates as \'91something that is inviting to follow\'92				utilizing an unexpected opportunity or inviting situation				A&W 25		igalnga-	igalnga-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 -\
igamriiqayuk	bufvh72f/r	illiterate person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 illiterate person	vfkjuhfvjnysq	< igagh-?		Rub. 138		igamriqayuk	igamrxqayuk	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1084 \u1088 \u1251 \u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \
igamsiqa-	bufvcb2f-	thankful		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  igamsiqayugtuq \'91he is thankful\'92; igamisiqayugvikaa \'91he expressed his thankfulness to her, he thanked her\'92; igamsiqayugutkaa \'91he is thankful for it\'92; igamsiqanaq \'91something that makes one thankful\'92; igamsiqanaghtuq \'91it makes one thankful\'92; Kinkut kayusinghinkut 
\f2\i igamsiqanaghtuq
\f0\i0 . \'91The helpfulness of others to us 
\f2\i makes one thankful
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 55); = iyamsiqa-	grateful												thankful; grateful		PY-S i!a-				igamsiqa-	igamsiqa-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 -\
igamsiqanaghhalek	bufvcb2fyf5fksr	thank you very much		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 =  iyamsiqanaghhalek	grateful (oh, how ~ that makes one!)												thank you very much; oh, how grateful that makes one!		< igamsiqa-naq-ghhalek				igamsiqanaghhalek	igamsiqanaghhalek	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
igangeltaq	buf3sk]nf2	leaflet		= igangestaq	pamphlet	tract (religious or the like)								design or decoration, small			leaflet; pamphlet; tract; small decoration; small design		< igaq-ngestaq				igangeltaq	igangeltaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
igangestaq	buf3scnf2	leaflet		= igangeltaq	pamphlet	tract (religious or the like)								design or decoration, small			leaflet; pamphlet; tract; small decoration; small design		< igaq-ngestaq				igangestaq	igangestaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
igaq	buf2	design		= iyaq; igiituq \'91it has no design\'92 or \'91he has no schooling\'92	tattoo (especially on a man's arm after he has caught a whale)	book								schooling			design; tattoo (especially on a man's arm after he has caught a whale); book; schooling		PY-S i!aq				igaq	igaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
igaqe-	buf2s-	write (it) down		igaqaa \'91he wrote it down or photographed it\'92 / igaqiiq \'91he took a picture\'92	photograph												to write (it) down; to photograph		< igaq-ke\super 1\nosupersub - (?)				igaqe-	igaqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
igaqegkaq	buf2surf2	photograph			written thing												photograph; something written		< igaqe-(g)kaq				igaqegkaq	igaqegkaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1075 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
igaqisiq	buf2bcb2	camera		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  igaqisik, 
\f2\i for one camera													
\f0\i0 camera		< igaqe-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				igaqisiq	igaqisiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
igaqista	buf2bcnf	photographer															photographer		< igaqe-i\super 1\nosupersub -(s)ta				igaqista	igaqista	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
igaqragh-	buf2if4-	make a design or trim		igaqraghtuq \'91he made a design\'92; igaqraghaa \'91he made a design on it\'92 / igaqraamakek kaamgegni \'91she put trim on her boots\'92	design (make a ~)	trim (make ~)								embroider			to make a design or trim; to embroider		< igagh-qraq				igaqragh-	igaqragh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1271 -\
igaqraq	buf2if2	design			trim	embroidery											design; trim; embroidery		< igaq-qraq				igaqraq	igaqraq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1179 \
igaqugh-	buf2e4-	photograph several times		igaqughaa \'91he photographed it or him several times\'92 /													to photograph several times		< igaqe-ugh-				igaqugh-	igaqugh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
igarutaagh-	bufhen64-	drill a hole		igarutaaghtuq \'91he drilled a hole\'92; igarutaaghaa \'91he drilled a hole in it\'92 / = iyarutaagh-													to drill a hole		PE ni!09u3-				igarutagh-	igarutxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1088 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
igarutaaq	bufhen62	drill		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 igarutaaghek
\f2\i , for one drill; 
\f0\i0 = iyarutaaq													drill		PE ni!09u3-				igarutaq	igarutxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1088 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
igatagh-	bufnf4-	hungry (be ~)		igataghtuq \'91he is hungry\'92 / = iyatagh-; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  igayughqe-													to be hungry	tcnm ujkjlty					igatagh-	igatagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
igataghnaq	bufnf4yf2	famine		= iyataghnaq													famine		< igatagh-naq				igataghnaq	igataghnaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
igataghniighusiq	bufnf4y74ecb2	song sung against hunger (due to sorcery or conspiracy)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 supplication song for food												song sung against hunger (due to sorcery or conpiracy); supplication song  for food		< igataghnaq-(ng)igh-(u)siq		CK Rub 139		igataghnighusiq	igataghnxghusiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
igatiqe-	bufnb2s-	hunger (suffer from ~)		Mekelghiighhaq negaghaghluku qawaagtaqelghii, enkaam ilangani 
\f2\i igatigalnguuk
\f0\i0  nengyuqulghiik. \'91The little boy would catch birds by snaring, and sometimes grandmother and grandson would not 
\f2\i go hungry
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AANGHHAQ 43) 	go hungry												to suffer from hunger; to go hungry		< igatagh-iqe-				igatiqe-	igatiqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
igayughqe-	buf/52s-	eat lots on account of hunger or for enjoyment		aghnelqusiq neghegpenani kiyaghlluni kaalluni igayughqumalghii \'91after existing without having eating all day when he arrived he ate a lot\'92; neqet igayughqutkii \'91he ate a lot of food\'92; = igaghyughqe-; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  igatagh-	eat one\'92s fill	overeat							check, but looks okay	gorge			to eat lots on account of hunger or for enjoyment; to eat one\'92s fill; to overeat; to gorge				A&W 25		igayughqe-	igayughqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
iggaarqitaagh-	b[6i2bn64-	rock back and forth															to rock back and forth		< iggag-?-qitaagh-			; > iggaarqitaaghusik	iggarqitagh-	iggxrqitxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1093 \u257 \u1096 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
iggaarqitaaghusiq	b[6i2bn64ecb2	see-saw		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  iggaarqitaaghusik
\f2\i , for one teeter-totter	
\f0\i0 teeter-totter												see-saw; teeter-totter		< iggarqitaagh-(u)siq				iggarqitaghusik	iggxrqitxghusik	\uc0\u1080 \u1093 \u257 \u1096 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
iggaarqitaaq	b[6i2bn62	see-saw		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 iggaarqitaaghek, 
\f2\i for one teeter-totter	
\f0\i0 teeter-totter												see-saw; teeter-totter		< iggag-?-qitaaq				iggarqitaq	iggxrqitxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1093 \u257 \u1096 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
iggag-	b[fu-	tilting		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0 iggagtuq \'91it tilted\'92; iggagtaa \'91he tilted it\'92 / iggagngaaq \'91it is tilting\'92													tilting		PE i!0!a3- or i!0!a!-			; > iigagpagtagh-, iggaggrakegte-, iggaarqitaagh-, iggasighte-, iggaarqitaaq	iggag-	iggag-	\uc0\u1080 \u1093 \u1072 \u1075 -\
iggagpagtagh-	b[f[gf[nf4-	rock (motion)		iggagpagtaghtuq \'91it rocked\'92													to rock		< iggag-ghpak-tagh\super 2\nosupersub -				iggagpagtagh-	iggagpagtagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1093 \u1072 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iggagrakegte-	b[fuhfrs[ns-	steep (be ~)		iggagrakegtuq \'91it is steep\'92 / yuuk iggagrakegtellghakun naaygham ukigtuq \'91the man came down on the steep side of the mountain\'92	slanted (be too ~)												to be steep; to be too slanted		< iggag-?-kegte-				iggagrakegte-	iggagrakegte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1093 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iggagrakgite-	b[fuhfr[bns-	steep (not be ~)		iggagrakgituq \'91it isn't steep\'92 /													to not be steep		< iggagrakegte-(ng)ite-				iggagrakgite-	iggagrakgite-	\uc0\u1080 \u1093 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1093 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iggasighte-	b[fcb5ns-	lie down supporting oneself on arm and elbow															to lie down supporting oneself on arm and elbow		PE i!0!a3- or i!0!a!-				iggasighte-	iggasighte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1093 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
igha-	b4f-	disgusted		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  ighayugtuq \'91he feels aversion or disgust\'92; ighayukaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ighakaa \'91he feels aversion or disgust towards it\'92; ighanaghtuq \'91it causes aversion or disgust\'92; ighanaq \'91disgusting thing\'92	aversion (feeling ~)												disgusted; feeling aversion		PY i3a-				igha-	igha-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1072 -\
ighaleqetaaghem anaa	b4fks2sn64sv fy6	comet		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91star\'92s feces\'92; 
\f2\i note that the phrase for \'91star\'92s feces\'92 in Central Yup\'92ik means \'91meteor\'92, but in Kobuk Inupiaq it means both \'91meteor\'92 and  \'91comet\'92													
\f0\i0 comet		< ighaleqetaaq-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + anaq-
\f2\i possessed		
\f0\i0 from Darlene Orr	xxxa	ighaleqetaghem ana	ighaleqetxghem anx	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1099 \u1084  \u1072 \u1085 \u257 \
ighaleqetaaq	b4fks2sn62	star		
\f6\i compare proto-Yupik
\f4\i0  
\f0 i3aluq
\f4  'moon, month', 
\f6\i and note that
\f4\i0  -qetaaq 
\f6\i is
\f4\i0  
\f6\i from the postbase
\f4\i0  -qitaaq 
\f6\i meaning
\f4\i0  'small' 
\f6\i or
\f4\i0  'back and forth', 
\f6\i so that the word 
\f4\i0 ighaleqetaaq
\f6\i  originally would have meant
\f4\i0  \'91small or twinkling moon\'92, 
\f6\i later
\f4\i0  \'91moon-like thing\'92													
\f0 star		PY i3aluq				ighaleqetaq	ighaleqetxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
ighaluqaq	b4fk/2f2	auklet aged in seal oil for eating		
\f6\i compare proto-Yupik
\f4\i0  
\f0 i3aluq
\f4  'moon, month', 
\f6\i and note that auklets are aged for about a month; the postbase in the word here being 
\f4\i0 -(g)kaq, \'91one that has been V-ed\'92													
\f0 auklet aged in seal oil for eating		PY i3aluq with postbase -(g)kaq				ighaluqaq	ighaluqaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
ighaluqi-	b4fk/2b-	age auklets in seal oil															to age auklets in seal oil		< ighaluqaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -				ighaluqi-	ighaluqi-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1179 \u1080 -\
ighelleghyiqe-	b4sk]s4qb2s-	limp															to limp		< ighu-?-liqe-				ighelleghyiqe-	ighelleghyiqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1253 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
igherngu-	b4sh3e-	uncomfortable		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  ighernguyugtuq \'91he felt disquieted by what he saw\'92; igherngunapigtuq ighungunateng yuget \'91people without legs can make one feel very awkward\'92; pegnem piyulghii ighernguyagusimaaq \'91the one walking with great effort became a cause of awkwardness to those watching him\'92	awkward	embarrassed							check, given as: igherngunaq, explained as efleghnaq, natesugnaq, which VK translates as \'91unordinary, to feel awkward about things\'92				uncomfortable, awkward, or embarrassed upon observing something that is too private, indecent or otherwise disquieting				A&W 25 (examples)		igherngu-	igherngu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1091 -\
ighi-	b4b-	flock		upenghanghani sukilpaq ighikayuk \'91in spring the auklet tend to flock\'92; ighikan qawaagyaqaghllequnga \'91when the birds become plentiful I\'92ll go bird-hunting\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ighivgaayaq	plentiful (be ~ (birds))								check, explained as: qawaak qernguqulghii, which VK translates as \'91when there are plentiful of some kind of bird\'92				to flock; to be plentiful (birds)				A&W 25		ighi-	ighi-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1080 -\
ighigh-	b4b4-	tilting (especially one's head)		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  ighightuq \'91he tilted his head\'92; ighightaa \'91he tilted it\'92 / ighighngaaq \'91it is tilted\'92													tilting (especially one's head)		PY i3i3-			ighighaghiitaq	ighigh-	ighigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ighighaghiitaq	b4b4f47nf2	support to keep something from tilting		ighighaghiitaq kelengakluku uullghaghsaqunaan \'91be careful with the support, and don\'92t let it fall over\'92													support to keep something from tilting		< ighigh-aghte-(ng)iitaq		A&W 25		ighighaghitaq	ighighaghxtaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ighighneq, ighighlleq	b4b4ys2. b4b5k]s2	ice, edge of ~ that has been carried north by current, then pushed south		
\f2\i see item 13 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice moved by current or wind to so that it collects in a bay or cove of land or of an ice field												edge of ice that has been carried north by current, then pushed south; sea ice moved by current or wind to so that it collects in a bay or cove of land or of an ice field				< ighigh-te\super 1\nosupersub -neq\super 2\nosupersub , ighigh-te\super 1\nosupersub -lleq\super 1		\nosupersub ighighneq, ighighlleq	ighighneq, ighighlleq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 , \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
ighileqitaagh-	b4bks2bn64-	tickle		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  ighileqitaaghtuq \'91he tickled someone\'92; ighileqitaaghaa \'91he tickled her\'92 / = qeleqetaagh-													to tickle						ighileqitagh-	ighileqitxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
ighivgaayaq	b4bdu6z2	evening flight of birds		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 ighi	birds flying in the evening	flight (evening ~ of birds)											evening flight of birds		< ighivgaq-?-				ighivgayaq	ighivgxyaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u257 \u1103 \u1179 \
ighivgaghniimna	b4bduf4y7vyf	yesterday (thing the same as that of ~)		ighivgaghniimnat ugket neghnaqaput \'91we\'92ll eat the same things as yesterday\'92; ighivgaghniimna movie pinaqlaataghaa \'91the movie is the same as yesterday\'92s\'92	thing from yesterday								check, explained as: tawaten ayuqelghii ighivgaq pikaghtun, which VK translates as \'91something of the day before or night before\'92				thing the same as that of yesterday; thing from yesterday		< ighivgaq-
\f2\i localis
\f0\i0   + iimna 
\f2\i (compound word)		
\f0\i0 A&W 25		ighivgaghnimna	ighivgaghnxmna	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
ighivgaghsi-	b4bduf5cb-	stay out late		Naken pizin? Ulapsaneng piziin? 
\f2\i Ighivgasighllalghiiten
\f0\i0 . \'91Where are you coming from? Are you coming from exercising? You\'92ve 
\f2\i been out very late
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:20)	late (stay out ~)												to stay out late		< ighivgaq-?-		VK\'92s notes		ighivgaghsi-	ighivgaghsi-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 -\
ighivgaq	b4bduf2	yesterday		ighivgaghmi \'91in the evening\'92; ighivgaangani \'91the day before yesterday, the evening of the day before yesterday, or in the evening of that particular day\'92; Iteghluni yuget esghaghyaqminiki, yuget ungagpalluut, 
\f2\i ighivgaghniineng
\f0\i0  aangelghiit. \'91He went in and when he saw the people he saw that they had heavy beards and were bigger 
\f2\i than (they had been) the day before
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 50)); ighivgaq 
\f2\i can serve as a particle as in 
\f0\i0 kaatut ighivgaq \'91they arrived yesterday\'92	evening	last night								yesterday evening			yesterday; evening; yesterday evening; last night	dxthf			CK V & E 125 (Russ vocab)	ighivgaqun, ighivgaqutaq; ighivgaqutaq; ighivgaghniimna	ighivgaq	ighivgaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
ighivgaqun	b4bduf2ey	evening (this ~)		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 tonight												this evening; tonight		< ighivgaq-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 ighivgaqun	ighivgaqun	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
ighivgaqutaq	b4bduf2enf2	supper		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 dinner												supper; dinner		< ighivgaq-qutaq				ighivgaqutaq	ighivgaqutaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ighleg-	b4ksu-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > ighlegtu, ighleke-, ighlegite-															PE i3(0)l0!-				ighleg-	ighleg-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
ighlegite-	b4ksubns-	generous (be ~)		ighlegituq \'91he is generous\'92 /	hold back (not ~ what one has)	give (not hesitate to ~)											to be generous; to not hold back what one has; to not hesitate to give		< ighleg-(ng)ite-				ighlegite-	ighlegite-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ighlegtu-	b4ks[ne-	stingy (be ~)		ighlegtuuq \'91he is stingy\'92 / ighlegtuqaq \'91stingy person\'92													to be stingy		< ighleg-tu-				ighlegtu-	ighlegtu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 -\
ighlegute-	b4ksuens-	refuse to give to (him)		ighlegutaa \'91he refused to give her something\'92 / 													to refuse to give to (him)		< ighlegtu-(u)te-				ighlegute-	ighlegute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ighleke-	b4ksrs-	possessive (be ~ of)		ighlekaa \'91he is reluctant to part with it, wouldn\'92t give any of it away\'92 / 	reluctant (be ~ to part with)	refuse to give (it) away											to be possessive of; to be reluctant to part with; to refuse to give (it) away		< ighleg-ke\super 2\nosupersub -			; > ighlekuughte-	ighleke-	ighleke-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 -\
ighlekuughte-	b4ksr85ns-	refuse absolutely to allow to leave		ighlekuughtaa aglaghtesneghmeng \'91he just wouldn't let her go home\'92													to absolutely refuse to allow to leave		< ighleke-?-				ighlekughte-	ighlekxghte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \u1263 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ighllegh-	b5k]s4-	push		ighlleghaa \'91he pushed her\'92 /	shove												to push; to shove					> ighlleghagh-, ighleghun	ighllegh-	ighllegh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 -\
ighlleghaasiq	b5k]s46cb2	back-pushing game		= ighlleghaan	cribbage board made from walrus tusk	game (back-pushing ~)											a certain back-pushing game; cribbage board made from walrus tusk		ighlleghagh-(u)siq				ighlleghasiq	ighlleghxsiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ighlleghaataq	b5k]s46nf2	back-pushing game		= ighlleghaasiq	cribbage board made from walrus tusk	game (back-pushing ~)											a certain back-pushing game; cribbage board made from walrus tusk		< ighlleghagh-(u)taq				ighlleghataq	ighlleghxtaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ighlleghagh-	b5k]s4f4-	push (keep on ~ing)		ighlleghaghaa \'91he kept pushing her\'92 /													to keep on pushing		< ighllegh-?-			; > ighlleghaataq	ighlleghagh-	ighlleghagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ighlleghun	b5k]s4ey	head of whaling harpoon			harpoon head	whaling harpoon head											head of whaling harpoon		< ighllegh-(u)n				ighlleghun	ighlleghun	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
ighllu-	b5k]/-	insert something into a hole		ighllaa \'91he inserted a rod or rod-rod like thing into it into it\'92 /	clean a gun barrel	enema (give an ~)											to insert something into a hole; to clean a gun barrel; to give an enema					 > ighlluughagh-, ighllusiq, ighllute-	ighllu-	ighllu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 -\
ighllusiq	b5k]/cb2	enema device															enema device		< ighllu-(u)siq				ighllusiq	ighllusiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ighllute-	b5k]/ns-	push into		ighllutuq \'91he pushed himself in\'92; ighllutaa \'91he pushed it in\'92 /													to push into		< ighllu-(u)te-				ighllute-	ighllute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ighlluughaan	b5k]046y	gun cleaning rod		= ighlluughaasiq													gun cleaning rod		< ighlluughagh-(u)n				ighllughan	ighllxghxn	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u257 \u1085 \
ighlluughaasiq	b5k]046cb2	gun cleaning rod		= ighlluughaan													gun cleaning rod		< ighlluughagh-(u)siq				ighllughasiq	ighllxghxsiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ighlluughagh-	b5k]04f4-	probing (keep on ~)		ighlluughaghaa \'91he kept probing into it\'92 / ighlluughaghaa suflugaq \'91he cleaned the gun\'92	cleaning (keep on ~)												to keep on probing or cleaning (as with a rifle-cleaning rod)		< ighllu-?-				ighllughagh-	ighllxghagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ighlutku-	b4k/nre-	chant in a quavering voice.															to chant in a quavering voice.						ighlutku-	ighlutku-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1083 \u1102 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 -\
ighneghaq	b4ys4f2	gut(s)		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  ighneghat; ighneghii neghsam saghnaki \'91save the seal guts\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 ighneghlluk	intestine(s)												gut(s); intestine(s)		< ighneq-ghaq (?)				ighneghaq	ighneghaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ighneghlli-	b4ys5k]b-	process and dry the intestines of walrus or bearded seal															to process and dry the intestines of walrus or bearded seal		< ighneghlluk-i\super 2\nosupersub -		VK		ighneghlli-	ighneghlli-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
ighneghlluk	b4ys5k]/r	walrus intestine, processed and dried		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ighneq, ighneghaq	intestine (walrus or bearded seal ~), processed and dried	bearded seal intestine, processed and dried											processed and dried walrus or bearded seal intestine		PY i3n03@uk				ighneghlluk	ighneghlluk	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
ighneghqaq	b4ys52f2	stepson			adopted son	son (step or adopted)											stepson; adopted son		< ighneq-kaq		CK Rub 147 CK		ighneghqaq	ighneghqaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
ighneghwaaghqut	b4ys41652en	school of fish		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 fish (school of ~)												school of fish		< ighneghwaaq-?-
\f2\i plural		
\f0\i0 CK Rub 147		ighneghwaghqut	ighneghwxghqut	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \
ighneghwaaq	b4ys4162	finger			toe												finger; toe		< ighneq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				ighneghwaq	ighneghwxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
ighnelqusiq	b4ysk]2ecb2	son (6-8 year old)		
\f2\i Chukotakan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 son (6-8 years old)	csy (6-8 ktn)	< ighneq-lqusiq		CK V & E  73		ighnelqusiq	ighnelqusiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ighneq	b4ys2	son		ighneqa \'91my son\'92; ighnegha \'91his son\'92; ighnelguunga \'91I have a son (or sons)\'92; ighneghitunga \'91I don\'92t have a son\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ighneghlluk													son		PE i3n03			> ighneghaq,  ighneghwaaq, ighni-; 	ighneq	ighneq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
ighneraaq	b4ysh62	son from a temporary wife		
\f2\i Chukotkan  (R)													
\f0\i0 son from a temporary wife		< ighneq-raaq		CK Rub 147		ighneraq	ighnerxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
ighni-	b4yb-	birth (give ~)		ighniiq \'91she gave birth\'92 /	give birth	rock cracks											to give birth; for a rock to crack		< ighneq-i\super 2\nosupersub -			; > ighninghhaq	ighni-	ighni-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 -\
ighniighwta	b4y751nf	female reindeer		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)	
\f0\i0 reindeer female												female reindeer		< ighni-(PE 
\f2\i pb. 
\f0\i0 -u3-)-(s)ta		CK E & V 52; Rub 148		ighnighwta	ighnxghwta	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1265 \u1090 \u1072 \
ighninghhaq	b4yby4hf2	newborn child			child, newborn	birth (woman who just gave ~)								woman who just gave birth			newborn child; woman who just gave birth		< ighni-nghhaq				ighninghhaq	ighninghhaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
ighnivik	b4ybdbr	motherland		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check whether used on SLI				motherland	hjlbyf	< ighni-vik		Rub. 147		ighnivik	ighnivik	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
ighsa-1	b5cz-\'a1	refuse		ighsaaq \'91he refused\'92 / ighsaaquq aglaneghmeng \'91he has been refusing to go home\'92													to refuse		PE 0q(0)ya-			ighsake-, ighsani-, ighsatagh-	ighsa-1	ighsa-1	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub ighsa-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub b5cz-\'99			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > ighsalquq, ighsalqughuk, ighsaqitagh-, ighsalqwaaq, ighsaquq																			ighsa-2	ighsa-2	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 -\super 2\
\nosupersub ighsaghqe-	b5cz52s-	come apart completely		ighsaghqaa \'91he broke or took it apart\'92/ ighsaghqiiq \'91he broke up something\'92; kellaagek ifkaghlukek ighsaghqengngwaaghumakek \'91by dropping the clock he caused it to fall apart completely\'92; qamiyegni ighsaghqumakek \'91he took his sled apart completely\'92	break apart completely	take apart completely								apart (completely come, break or take ~)			to completely come apart, break apart or take apart				A&W 25 (examples)		ighsaghqe-	ighsaghqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ighsake-	b5czrs-	refuse (him, her, it)		ighsakaa \'91he refused it\'92; tuunyaghaqa ighsakaa pilguniluni \'91he refused the thing I was trying to give (him) saying he already had (one)\'92; maligunnaqelghii ighsakaa kimaawistiinayukan \'91he refused (to take) the one who was going to come along lest he should slow (us) down\'92													to refuse (him, her, it)		< ighsa-ke\super 2\nosupersub -		A&W 25 (examples)		ighsake-	ighsake-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 -\
ighsalqaq	b5czk]2f2	throat		
\f2\i also dual for one throat:
\f0\i0  ighsalqagka \'91my throat\'92; ighsalqaghlluk \'91sore throat\'92; ighsalqaghllulguuq \'91he has a sore throat\'92													throat		< ighsa\super 2\nosupersub -?-				ighsalqaq	ighsalqaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
ighsalqite-	b5czk]2bns-	anxious (be ~)			worried (be ~)												to be anxious; to be worried						ighsalqite-	ighsalqite-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ighsalqughruk	b5czk]2e4her	windpipe															windpipe		< ighsa\super 2\nosupersub -?-quq-ruk				ighsalqughruk	ighsalqughruk	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
ighsalqwaaq	b5czk]2162	larynx															larynx		< ighsa\super 2\nosupersub -?-quq-?				ighsalqwaq	ighsalqwxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
ighsani-	b5czyb-	refuse to do as told (from laziness or general disinclination)															to refuse to do as told (from laziness or general disinclination)		< ighsa\super 1\nosupersub -neq\super 2\nosupersub -i\super 2\nosupersub -				ighsani-	ighsani-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 -\
ighsanitagh-	b5czybnf4-	lazy (be ~)		ighsanitalghii \'91lazy one\'92; Taagken taam kingunganeng ateqsunghisamigu Ugharratuqaq 
\f2\i ighsanitiighusimakanga
\f0\i0 . \'91Then in the aftermath of that, since he didn\'92t want to have the name Mudball, it made him no longer 
\f2\i be lazy
\f0\i0 .\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 18)	disinclined (be ~ to act)												to be lazy; to be disinclined to act		< ighsani-tagh\super \'a3\nosupersub -				ighsanitagh-	ighsanitagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ighsaqitagh-	b5cz2bnf4-	pounding heart (have a ~)		ighsaqitaghtuq \'91his heart is pounding, fluttering or palpitating\'92	fluttering heart (have a ~)	palpitating heart (have a ~)								heart (have a pounding, fluttering or palpitating ~)			to have a pounding, fluttering, or palpitating heart		< ighsa\super 2\nosupersub -?-				ighsaqitagh-	ighsaqitagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ighsaqughllug-	b5cz2e5k]/u-	heart trouble (get or have ~)		ighsaqughllugtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ighsaqughllugaa \'91his heart became bad\'92													to get or have heart trouble		< ighsaquq-lluk				ighsaqughllug-	ighsaqughllug-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
ighsaqughwaaq	b5cz2e4162	clock		
\f2\i probably so called because of the ticking of a clock sounds like a heart; often used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 ighsaqughwaaghek, f
\f2\i or one clock or watch	
\f0\i0 watch (wrist- or pocket-)												clock; watch (wrist- or pocket-)		< ighsaquq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				ighsaqughwaq	ighsaqughwxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
ighsaquq	b5cz2e2	heart															heart		PE i3caqu3; < ighsa\super 2\nosupersub -quq			; > ighsalqughllug-, ighsaqughwaara	ighsaquq	ighsaquq	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
ighsatagh-	b5cznf4-	refuse (habitually ~ to do as told or asked (as from shyness, haughtiness, etc.))															to habitually refuse to do as told or asked (as from shyness, haughtiness, etc.)		< ighsa\super 1\nosupersub -tagh\super \'a3\nosupersub -				ighsatagh-	ighsatagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ighsayagute-	b5czzuens-	get on one\'92s nerves		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 pester								check				to get on one\'92s nerves; to pester	yfljtlfnm	< ighsa\super 1\nosupersub -yagute-		Rub. 186		ighsayagute-	ighsayagute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ightugh-	b5ne4-	soft (become ~ through being flexed)		ightughtuq \'91it got soft by being flexed\'92 / ightughtaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ightughtestaa \'91he softened it by flexing it\'92; ightughqaa \'91he crumpled it up\'92													to become soft through being flexed		PE i3tu3-				ightugh-	ightugh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
ighu	b4e	leg		ighunga \'91his leg\'92	boat piece ("leg"-like side-piece on flat-bottomed boat)												leg; "leg"-like side-piece on flat-bottomed boat		PE ni3u			; > ighelleghyiqe-, ighunaq, ighungigh-, ighungwaaq, ighwaaghte-	ighu	ighu	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \
ighuli, ighulin	b4ekb. b4ekby	roof support, temporary in the traditional dome-shaped house			pole of summer tent	tent pole							
\f2\i see Parts of Traditional House in Appendix				
\f0\i0 temporary roof support in the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.); pole of summer tent		< ighu-?		CK Rub 147; Lore of SLI vol 1:101		ighuli, ighulin	ighuli, ighulin	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 , \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \
ighulquq	b4ek]2e2	crab		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 crab		< ighu-quq		CK		ighulquq	ighulquq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
ighuluq	b4eke2	pole (tent ~ or arched roof pole of the traditional dome-shaped house)			roof pole, arched, of the traditional dome-shaped house	tent pole							
\f2\i see Parts of Traditional House in Appendix				
\f0\i0 tent pole; arched roof pole of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		PE ni3ulu (under PE ni3u); < ighu-?		CK Rub 147		ighuluq	ighuluq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1091 \u1179 \
ighunaaq	b4ey62	bipod support for gun		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 ighunaaghek, 
\f2\i for one such bipod support	
\f0\i0 support, bipod, for gun												bipod support for gun		< inghu-?		CK Rub 147		ighunaq	ighunxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
ighunaq	b4eyf2	leg-like part of sled or the like			stanchion of sled												something that is like a leg in appearance or function such as the part of a sled that holds the bed to the runners; stanchion of sled		< ighu-naq				ighunaq	ighunaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
ighungigh-	b4e3b4-	injure the leg		ighungightuq \'91he injured his leg\'92, \'91he lost his leg\'92	leg (injure the ~)	lose a leg through injury or amputation											to injure the leg; to lose a leg through injury or amputation		< ighu-(ng)igh-				ighungigh-	ighungigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ighungwaaq	b4e3162	support, bipod, for gun		ighungwaaghek, 
\f2\i for one such bipod gun support	
\f0\i0 bipod support for gun												bipod support for gun		< ighu-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		gloss 2 CK 148		ighungwaq	ighungwxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
ighutaq	b4enf2	side pole or stretcher or the like															side pole or stretcher or the like		< ighu-taq\super 1		\nosupersub VK		ighutaq	ighutaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ighwaaghte-	b4165ns-	injure the leg		ighwaaghtuq \'91his or its leg got injured\'92; ighwaaghtaa \'91he injured its leg\'92 / quyngiq ighwaaghtekaq qikmim tugumaa \'91the dog caught a reindeer that had an injured leg\'92									note CAY iruarte- \'91to get injured in the leg\'92 (from postbase -(ng)ar(ar)te- \'91to hit in the N\'92)				to injure the leg		< ighu-?-				ighwaghte-	ighwxghte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ighwaaghtuute-	b4165n8ns-	roll (lay and ~ on the ground or in the snow (of dogs))		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ighu													to lay and roll on the ground or in the snow (of dogs)						ighwaghtute-	ighwxghtxte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ighyaghqe-	b4mz52s-	grimace		ighyaghquq \'91he grimaced\'92 /													to grimace		PE i3ya!-\super 1\nosupersub ; < ighyagte-?-				ighyaghqe-	ighyaghqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ighyagte-	b4mz[ns-	frown		ighyagtuq \'91he frowned\'92, \'91it (baby) wailed\'92 / ighyagutaa \'91he frowned at her\'92	wail (of a baby)												to frown; to wail (of a baby)		PE i3ya!-\super 1				\nosupersub ighyagte-	ighyagte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
igi-	bub-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > igiilluten, igiilngagh-, igiilnguq, igiisnayiite-, igiisniilnguq, igiitusigate-, igiitaghaq																			igi-	igi-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1080 -\
igiigh-	bu74-	get in shape or get strong after an illness		igiightuq \'91he got in shape\'92 / igiightaa \'91he set it straight\'92	stand up straight	strong (get ~ after an illness)								make up one\'92s mind			to get in shape; to stand up straight; to get strong after an illness; to make up one's mind					; > igiighneq, igiighsagh-	igigh-	igxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1271 -\
igiighneq	bu74ys2	decision, final															final decision		< igiigh-neq\super 2				\nosupersub igighneq	igxghneq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
igiighsagh-	bu75cz4-	train physically			physically train	work out (exercise)											to train physically; to work out (exercise)		< igiigh-sagh-				igighsagh-	igxghsagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
igiilluten	bu7k]/nsy	behave yourself!		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 nice (be ~!)												behave yourself!; be nice!		< igi-?--
\f2\i subordinative				
\f0\i0 igilluten	igxlluten	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \
igiilngagh-	bu7k3f4-	avoid bumping or being hit		igiilngaghyughngaaghma tumet qellikat maligtanka \'91even though I wanted to travel (there), I followed the path that was  packed down\'92; ukagun igiilgngalta \'91let\'92s go this way\'92	mistreat	travel near a certain area							strange combination of glosses; the final one is from A&W, explained as: qantaghallghakun iglegha, which VK translates as \'91traveling near some area\'92; check				to avoid bumping or being hit; to mistreat; to travel near a certain area		< igi-(ng)ite-?-		A&W 26		igilngagh-	igxlngagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
igiilnguq* 	bu7k3e2	straight path			path, straight												straight path		< igi-?-nguq				igilnguq* 	igxlnguq* 	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
igiisigalnguq*	bu7cbufk3e2	stealthy person			sneaky person												stealthy, sneaky person		< igi-?-igate-nguq				igisigalnguq*	igxsigalnguq*	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
igiisnayiite-	bu7cy]fq7ns-	sly (be ~)		igiisnayiilnguq \'91a careless person\'92	unpredictable in a threatening way (be ~)	careless (be ~)							check; given in A&W as igiisnayiilnguq, explained as: pinitun pingigalnguq, which VK translates as \'91careless person\'92	untrustworthy (be ~)			to be sly; to be unpredictable in a threatening way; to be careless; to be untrustworthy		< igi-?-		A&W 26		igisnayite-	igxsnayxte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1253 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
igiisniilnguq*	bu7cy7k3e2	stealthy person			sneaky person												stealthy, sneaky person		< igi-?-naq-(?)ite-nguq				igisnilnguq*	igxsnxlnguq*	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1089 \u1085 \u1251 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
igiitaghaq	bu7nf4f2	wind, steady from any direction		igiitaghaaghsaaghaa wiin kelutmun qiivelta \'91lets turn toward the land in case the wind picks up\'92; aywaaneng igiitaghaq kaatuq \'91the wind is picking up from the north\'92									check, but looks okay				steady wind from any direction		< igi-?		A&W 26 (examples); SLI Cur. Man. 21		igitaghaq	igxtaghaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
igiiterug-	bu7nsheu-	behave well		Kaviighhaam pii, \'93ii-ii pigpenang, qayngunwhaa 
\f2\i igiiterugnaanghituten
\f0\i0 .\'94 \'91The fox said to him, \'93oh-oh, you\'92d better not; you might do something awkward, not 
\f2\i behave well
\f0\i0 .\'94\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:232)													to behave well		< igi-?-				igiterug-	igxterug-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 -\
igiitusigate-	bu7necbufns-	sneaky (be ~)		igiitusigalnguuk \'91the two that don\'92t deal honestly with each other\'92	underhanded (be ~)												to be sneaky; to be underhanded		< igi-?-(ng)igate-				igitusigate-	igxtusigate-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
igilngagh-	bubk3f4-	walk past something		apam igilngaamaa uqfik \'91grandfather walked past the tree\'92													to walk past something						igilngagh-	igilngagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
igkamsug-	b[rfvc/u-	stalk something		igkamsugvikaa mekelghiighem aqergiiq \'91the boy stalked the ptarmigan\'92; aghnaq igkamsukestaghaqeftuq \'91the lady was tiptoeing\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iigkaghagh- \'91to sneak up on\'92													to stalk something						igkamsug-	igkamsug-	\uc0\u1080 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
iglag-	bukzu-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > iglagigh-, iglagiisit, iglagkestaaghhaat, iglagute-															PE il(l)a!-				iglag-	iglag-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 -\
iglagaaq	bukzu62	willow (edible smaller roots of the ground ~)			roots (edible smaller ~ of the ground willow)												edible smaller roots of the ground willow		< iglak-?-				iglagaq	iglagxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 \
iglagigh-	bukzub4-	untangle (hair, rope, etc.)		iglagighaa aghnam nuyani \'91the woman untangled her hair\'92; iglagiitaa \'91he untangled something for her\'92													to untangle (hair, rope, etc.)		< iglag-igh-			; > iglagiisit	iglagigh-	iglagigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
iglagiisit	bukzu7cbn	comb with large teeth															comb with large teeth		PE il(l)a!i3un (under PE il(l)a!-); < iglagigh-(u)siq-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 iglagisit	iglagxsit	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \
iglagkestaaghhaat	bukz[rscn656n	comb with small teeth															comb with small teeth		< iglag-?-staaghhaq-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 iglagkestaghhat	iglagkestxghhxt	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1093 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u257 \u1090 \
iglagllengiiq	bukz[k]s372	sandpiper (western ~)		
\f2\i so called because it\'92s call sounds like a hoarse human voice	
\f0\i0 western sandpiper	
\f2\i Calidris mauri											
\f0\i0 western sandpiper 
\f2\i (Calidris mauri)		
\f0\i0 < iglak-?-				iglagllengiq	iglagllengxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1251 \u1179 \
iglaglluugte-	bukz[k]0uns-	hoarse (get or be ~)		iglaglluugtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  iglaglluugtaa \'91he got hoarse\'92 /													get or be hoarse		< iglak-lluk-?-				iglagllugte-	iglagllxgte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1075 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iglagrugtaagh-	bukzuhe[n64-	yodel															to yodel		< iglak-ruk-?-				iglagrugtagh-	iglagrugtxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
iglagtu-	bukz[ne-	loud voice (have or use a ~)		iglagtuluni \'91(speaking) in a loud voice\'92													to have or use a loud voice		< iglak-tu-			; > iglagtusiq	iglagtu-	iglagtu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 -\
iglagtunaasiq	bukz[ney6cb2	megaphone			microphone	public address system											megaphone; microphone; public address system		< iglagtu-nagh-(u)siq				iglagtunasiq	iglagtunxsiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
iglagtusiq	bukz[necb2	megaphone			microphone	public address system											megaphone; microphone; public address system		< iglagtu-(u)siq				iglagtusiq	iglagtusiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
iglagute-	bukzuens-	tangle		iglagutuq \'91it got tangled\'92; iglagutaa \'91he tangled it\'92 /													to tangle		PE il(l)a!-; < iglag-te\super 3\nosupersub -				iglagute-	iglagute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iglak	bukzr	voice			windpipe												voice; windpipe; throat		PE i!la!- (under i!0-)			> iglagaaq, iglagllengiiq, iglaglluugte-, ilagrugtaagh-, iglagtu-, iglakegte-, iglalqwaaq, iglalqughruk	iglak	iglak	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \
iglakegte-	bukzrs[ns-	pleasant voice (have a ~)		iglakegtuq \'91he has a nice voice, sings well\'92; iglakegtaq \'91a person with a pleasant voice, one who sings well\'92	sing well												to have a pleasant voice; to sing well		< iglak-kegte-				iglakegte-	iglakegte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iglalqughruk	bukzk]2e4her	windpipe															windpipe		< iglak-quq-ruk				iglalqughruk	iglalqughruk	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
iglalqwaaq	bukzk]2162	esophagus															esophagus		< iglak-quq-?-				iglalqwaq	iglalqwxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
iglegha-	buks4f-	traveling (be ~)		igleghaaq \'91he is traveling\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91it (machine) is running\'92	running (be ~ (of machinery))												to be traveling; to be running (of machinery)		PE 0!l03-; < igleghte-?-			; > igleghalgun, igleghasta, igleghfik	iglegha-	iglegha-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 -\
igleghalgun	buks4fkuey	traveling companion															traveling companion		< iglegha-lgun				igleghalgun	igleghalgun	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
igleghasta	buks4fcnf	traveler															traveler		< iglegha-(s)ta				igleghasta	igleghasta	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
igleghavik	buks4fdbr	trail			route												trail; route		< iglegha-vol		VK		igleghavik	igleghavik	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
igleghfik	buks5abr	trail			route												trail; route		< igleghte-vik				igleghfik	igleghfik	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \
igleghte-	buks5ns-	travel		igleghtuq \'91he went traveling\'92 / igleghtem tagtalangani \'91in the course of his travels\'92; Ullghitagka 
\f2\i igleghteslukek
\f0\i0  nuugtagka uusqallghanun. \'91I 
\f2\i started up
\f0\i0  my wheeled/tracked vehicle and moved it to higher ground.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 58)	move	go								start			to travel; to move; to go; to start		PE 0!l03-			; > iglegha-, igleghfik	igleghte-	igleghte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Igllutka	B[k]/nrf	Nayvak Lake (the lagoon where old Chaplino is at the eastern corner) in Chukotka [site located to the west of ~]		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site located to the west of Lake Nayvak (the lagoon where old Chaplino is at the eastern corner) in Chukotka				CK		Igllutka	Igllutka	\uc0\u1048 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \
igu-	bue-	remove meat or other food from a pot after cooking		iguuq \'91she took meat out\'92; iwaa \'91she took it out \'91/ iwii \'91she took them out\'92; igutaa \'91she took meat out for him\'92; igutuq \'91she took meat out for herself\'92													to remove meat or other food from a pot after cooking		PE i!zu3-				igu-	igu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1091 -\
igugh-	bue4-	defend		igughaa \'91he defended her\'92 / igughiiq \'91he defended someone\'92; ighughivikamken \'91I defended someone against you\'92	stick up for												to defend; to stick up for		PE i!9u3-			remove meat or other food from a pot after cooking	igugh-	igugh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
igughpagte-	bue5gf[ns-	jell rapidly		igughpagtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  igughpagtaa \'91it jelled rapidly\'92 /													to jell rapidly		< igughte-pagte-				igughpagte-	igughpagte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
igughqe-	bue52s-	rigor mortis (for ~ to set in one)		igughqaa \'91rigor mortis set in on him\'92 /													for rigor mortis to set in one		< igughte-?-				igughqe-	igughqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
igughsaqneq	bue5cz2y]s2	one who always wants someone to defend him															one who always wants someone to defend him		< igugh-?-neq				igughsaqneq	igughsaqneq	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
igughte-	bue5ns-	jell		igughtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  igughtaa \'91it jelled\'92/ igughmelnguq \'91jelled thing\'92	congeal	stiffen											to jell; to congeal; to stiffen		PE i!$u3-			; > igughpagte-, igughqe-	igughte-	igughte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iguk	buer	testicle															testicle		PE i!9u!				iguk	iguk	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1082 \
igyawiste-	bumz1bcns-	not have time		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  piyaniighta igyawisimaa guunnaqelghii \'91the hunter ran out of time while he was about to shoot\'92	time (not have ~)												to not have time		possibly from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 145		igyawiste-	igyawiste-	\uc0\u1080 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1265 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ihi	b]b	doubt (expression of ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle	
\f0\i0 distrust (expression of ~)	irony (expression of ~)								expression of doubt, distrust or irony			expression of doubt, distrust or irony				CK Rub 140		ihi	ihi	\uc0\u1080 \u1100 \u1080 \
ihihihiy	b]b]b]bq	expression of fright, surprise or suffering		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle	
\f0\i0 surprise (expression of ~)	suffering (expression of ~)								fright (expression of ~)			expression of fright, surprise or suffering		< ihi 
\f2\i (repeated)		
\f0\i0 CK Rub 140		ihihihiy	ihihihiy	\uc0\u1080 \u1100 \u1080 \u1100 \u1080 \u1100 \u1080 \u1253 \
ihihihiyagh-	b]b]b]bz4-	groan		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to groan		< ihihihiy-?-		CK Rub 140		ihihihiyagh-	ihihihiyagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1100 \u1080 \u1100 \u1080 \u1100 \u1080 \u1103 \u1271 -\
ihik	b]br	just like that		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle; 
\f0\i0 ihik ihik ihik aleghqwaa wata \'91just like that, just like that, just like that, talk more\'92													just like that				CK Rub 140		ihik	ihik	\uc0\u1080 \u1100 \u1080 \u1082 \
ii-i, ii-ii	7-b. 7-7	see, this is how it is		
\f2\i particle; used when showing how something is, or telling someone not to do something (now); i
\f0\i0 i-i pillugutefqaafsi \'91don\'92t  fight now you guys\'92	don\'92t do it (not now at least)												see, this is how it is; don\'92t do it (not now at least)		PE i(i)\super 2		\nosupersub second gloss from VK\'92s notes		i-i, i-i	x-i, x-x	\uc0\u1251 -\u1080 , \u1251 -\u1251 \

\f1\b iigga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 7[f\super s	\nosupersub hand		iiggeka \'91my hand\'92 (
\f2\i irreg., since not 
\f0\i0 iigka); iigga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  iiggenga \'91his hand\'92 (
\f2\i irreg., since not 
\f0\i0 iiggnga); iiggit 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  iiggengit \'91their hands\'92 (
\f2\i irreg., since not 
\f0\i0 iiggngit); 
\f2\i my be used in the plural for a person's two hands or a single hand:  
\f0\i0 iiggenka ghuutii \'91my hands are cold\'92; iiggi \'91his hand(s)\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iigge-; cf. iiggaq													hand		PE a9(!)a3 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  a9(!)a!				iggae	xggae	\uc0\u1251 \u1093 \u1072 \u1099 \
iiggaq	7[f2	glove		iiggaqa \'91my glove\'92; iiggaa \'91his glove\'92; iiggiit \'91their gloves\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iigga													glove		PE a9!a(C)a3				iggaq	xggaq	\uc0\u1251 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
iigge-	7[s-	dig		iigguq \'91he dug\'92; iiggaa \'91he dug it\'92 / iiggutaa \'91he dug for her\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he dug for it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iigga													to dig					 > iigsagh-, iigtugh-, iiggeluughqe-, iigkutaq	igge-	xgge-	\uc0\u1251 \u1093 \u1099 -\
iiggeluughqe-	7[sk052s-	contaminate by touching		
\f2\i for example touching a bird's egg or animal's young so that the mother abandons it;
\f0\i0  iiggeluughqaa \'91he contaminated it\'92 /													to contaminate by touching		< igge-?-				iggelughqe-	xggelxghqe-	\uc0\u1251 \u1093 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
iiggereghwaagh-	7[shs4164-	dig for artifacts															to dig for artifacts		< iigge-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-		VK		iggereghwagh-	xggereghwxgh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1093 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
iigh-	74-	hide		iightuq \'91he hid\'92; iighaa \'91he hid it\'92 / iighaq \'91hidden thing\'92; iighvik \'91hiding place\'92; iighaghtughaa \'91he hid her (from her enemies)\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he kept it hidden\'92\'92													to hide		PE i903-			; > iighaate-	igh-	xgh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 -\
iighaate-	746ns-	play hide-and-seek			hide-and-seek (play ~)												to play hide-and-seek		< iigh-?-(u)te-				ighate-	xghxte-	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iighagh-, iighaghllug-	74f4-. 74f5k]/u-	gland (get or have a swollen ~)			swollen gland (get or have a ~)												to get or have a swollen gland		PE 0903a(3)				ighagh-, ighaghllug-	xghagh-, xghaghllug-	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -, \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
iighaq	74f2	swollen gland in neck or side of face			gland, swollen, in neck or side of face	neck (side of ~ near lower part of jaw)											swollen gland in neck or side of face; side of neck near lower part of jaw		PE 0903a(3)				ighaq	xghaq	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
iigharaagh-	74fh64-	play hide-and-seek		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 hide-and-seek (play ~)												to play hide-and-seek	ghznrb			CK V & E 99		igharagh-	xgharxgh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
iighhaata	756nf	loop of walrus hide		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 loop of walrus hide				CK Rub 184		ighhata	xghhxta	\uc0\u1251 \u1203 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \
iighhaq*	75f2	string story			cat\'92s cradle												string story; cat's cradle		PE aya3a3a3				ighhaq*	xghhaq*	\uc0\u1251 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
iighhwaange-	75163s-	frustrated (feel very ~)		iighhwaanguq \'91he is feeling very frustrated\'92 / taghnughhiita iighhwaangestaat \'91her children made the woman have a hard time\'92; iighhwaangutii taghnughhani \'91she is feeling very frustrated over her children\'92	hard time (have a ~ from frustration)												to feel very frustrated; to have a hard time from frustration						ighhwange-	xghhwxnge-	\uc0\u1251 \u1203 \u1265 \u257 \u1187 \u1099 -\
iighsiigh-	75c74-	hoist (use a ~ on)		iighsiiqaghluku ayveghput qaakaghput \'91we pulled our walrus up onto the elevated place by using a hoist on it\'92									check; explained as: iighsughvingllaq \'91making a place to hoist things\'92				to use a hoist on		< iighsugh-?		A&W 26		ighsigh-	xghsxgh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
iighsugh-	75c/4-	hoist with rope		iighsughtuq \'91he hoisted something\'92; iighsughaa \'91he hoisted it\'92 / iighsuutet 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  iighsughvik \'91block and tackle or other hoisting apparatus\'92													to hoist with rope						ighsugh-	xghsugh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\
iighsuun	75c8y	rope one pulley															rope on pulley		< iighsugh-(u)n				ighsun	xghsxn	\uc0\u1251 \u1203 \u1089 \u1263 \u1085 \
iightaghwaaghet	75nf4164sn	chain, heavy-duty		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); this is a plural used for one chain									
\f0\i0 check				heavy-duty chain	njkcnfz wtgm			Rub. 186		ightaghwaghet	xghtaghwxghet	\uc0\u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \
iighw-	741-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > iighwigh-, iighwite-															PE 0lu(3)-				ighw-	xghw-	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 \u1265 -\
iighwaghtute-	741f5nens-	lie around		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 to lie around	dfkzncz			CK V & E 164		ighwaghtute-	xghwaghtute-	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iighwigh-	741b4-	become whole		iighwightuq (iighwighluni) \'91it became whole\'92 / iighwightaa (iighwighlluku) \'91he made it whole\'92	whole (become ~)												to become whole		< iighw-igh-				ighwigh-	xghwigh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1080 \u1271 -\
iighwilkaaq	741bk]r62	ice cake (medium size ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iighwilnguq; 
\f2\i see item 14 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 et al. 2004	sea ice type												medium size cake of ice		< iighwite-?				ighwilkaq	xghwilkxq	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u257 \u1179 \
iighwilnguq*	741bk3e2	ice cake (large ~)		
\f2\i may have some pressure ridges but no bumps; cf.
\f0\i0  iighwilkaaq	sea ice type	whole thing											large size cake of ice; whole thing		< iighwite-nguq		gloss 3 Rub 148		ighwilnguq*	xghwilnguq*	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
iighwite-	741bns-	whole (be ~)		iighwituq \'91it is whole\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0   \'91she hasn\'92t given birth (yet)\'92 / iighwilnguq \'91whole thing\'92	birth (not have given ~ (yet))												to be whole; to not have given birth (yet)		PE 0lu(3)- (?); < iighw-ite-				ighwite-	xghwite-	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iighwte-	751ns-	sip a liquid		iighwtuq \'91he sipped\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91the tide went out\'92; iighwtaa \'91he sipped it\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91the tide washed it out\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iikw	tide goes down or out												to sip a liquid; for tide to go down or out; for tide to wash (it) out						ighwte-	xghwte-	\uc0\u1251 \u1203 \u1265 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iighwziig-	741p7u-	inhale		iighwziigtuq \'91he inhaled\'92 or \'91the waves went out\'92 / qagit iighwziillghit iknaqepigtut \'91the pull of the waves going out is strong\'92	waves go out												to inhale; for waves to go out		< iighwte-?-				ighwzig-	xghwzxg-	\uc0\u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1079 \u1251 \u1075 -\
iigkaghagh-	7[rf4f4-	sneak up on		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  igkamsug- \'91to stalk\'92	tiptoe to	creep up on							check this, especially length of first vowel; cf. igkamsug- \'91to stalk\'92 -- it\'92s okay (see Akiing.)				to sneak up on; to tiptoe to; to creep up to	gjlrhflsdfnmcz			Rub. 183; Akiingqwaghneghet 110		igkaghagh-	xgkaghagh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iigkutaq	7[renf2	rake for use on grass															rake for use on grass		< igge-qutaq				igkutaq	xgkutaq	\uc0\u1251 \u1093 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
iigna 	7uyf	one in an east or west direction		
\f2\i restricted demonstrative pronoun; base is 
\f0\i0 ing-;
\f2\i  although the absolutive singular pronoun has 
\f0\i0 g, 
\f2\i the
\f0\i0  ng 
\f2\i of the base can be seen in most of the forms here; singular relative pronoun: 
\f0\i0 ingum \'91(of) the one over there\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 iingkut \'91those over there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative: 
\f0\i0 iingyuq \'91you, over there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: 
\f0\i0 tazigna \'91that one over there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 ingani \'91over there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb: 
\f0\i0 ingavek \'91to over there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 iing'ggun \'91through over there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb: 
\f0\i0 iingken \'91from over there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional:
\f0\i0  inga \'91there (over there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 tazingani \'91there, over there\'92	over there (that one ~)												that one over there; the one in an east or west direction		PE dem. i&-				igna 	xgna 	\uc0\u1251 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
iigsagh-	7[cz4-	dig (go ~ing (as for artifacts, auklets aged underground, or other buried items))		iigsaghtuq \'91he went digging\'92 /													to go digging (as for artifacts, auklets aged underground, or other buried items)		< igge-yagh\super 1\nosupersub -				igsagh-	xgsagh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
iigtugh-	7[ne4-	dig with intensity		iigtughtuq \'91he reallly dug\'92; iigtughaa \'91he really dug it\'92 / = iitugh-													to dig with intensity		< iigge-?-				igtugh-	xgtugh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
iikaaq	7r62	merganser			
\f2\i Mergus spp.												
\f0\i0 merganser (Mergus spp.)						ikaq	xkxq	\uc0\u1251 \u1082 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b iikaghagh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 7rf4f4-\super \'a1	\nosupersub tiptoe		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  iikaghaghtuq \'91he is tiptoeing\'92; iikaghaghaa \'91he is tiptoeing up to it\'92 /													to tiptoe						ikaghagh-1	xkaghagh-1	\uc0\u1251 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub iikaghagh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 7rf4f4-\'99	undone (suddenly come ~)		iikaghaghtuq \'91it came off accidently\'92	come off by accident												to suddenly come undone; to come off by accident		< iike-?-				ikaghagh-2	xkaghagh-2	\uc0\u1251 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub iike-	7rs-	remove		iikuq \'91it came undone\'92; iikaa \'91he removed it\'92 / iikiiq \'91he removed something\'92; iikeneq, iikelleq \'91a little piece removed from something\'92; iikaq \'91a large piece\'92; Tuguluku ellngaan, meteghlluk 
\f2\i iikituq
\f0\i0  papegmi melqwaneng, yataaghqesqaa teghla. \'91Taking the sooty lamp residue, the raven 
\f2\i removed
\f0\i0  one of his tail-feathers, and told the owl to get ready.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 27)	unfasten												to remove; to unfasten		<
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 ike-			; > iiksigh-, iikaghagh[2]-	ike-	xke-	\uc0\u1251 \u1082 \u1099 -\
iikiiqaq	7r72f2	slice, large flat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				large flat slice of something	kjvjnm	< iike-?		Rub. 150		ikiqaq	xkxqaq	\uc0\u1251 \u1082 \u1251 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
iikna	7ry]f	across (that one ~ there)		
\f2\i restricted demonstrative pronoun; base is  
\f0\i0 ik-; 
\f2\i singular relative pronoun: 
\f0\i0 ikum (of) the one across there; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 ikegkut those across there; 
\f2\i vocative: 
\f0\i0 iiksuq you, across there; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun:
\f0\i0  tazikna that one across there; 
\f2\i localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 ikani across there; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  ikavek to across there; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 ikagun through across there; 
\f2\i ablative adverb: 
\f0\i0 ikegken from across there; 
\f2\i interjectional: 
\f0\i0 ika there (across there)!; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 tazikani there, across there	over (that one ~ there)	south or east (that one to the ~)								that one across or over there or to the south or east			that one across or over there or to the south or east		PE dem. ik-				ikna	xkna	\uc0\u1251 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \
iiksigh-	7rcb4-	ice piece partially detaches from shore ice			detach (begin to ~)												for a piece of ice to partially detach from shore ice; to begin to detach		< iike-sigh-				iksigh-	xksigh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1082 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\

\f1\b iiksiin\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 7rc7y\super \'a1	\nosupersub detached piece of ice			ice (detached piece of ~)												a detached piece of ice		< iiksigh-(u)n				iksin1	xksxn1	\uc0\u1251 \u1082 \u1089 \u1251 \u1085 1\

\f1\b iiksiin\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 7rc7y\super \'99	\nosupersub bracelet		
\f2\i Chukotkan; questioned													
\f0\i0 bracelet						iksin2	xksxn2	\uc0\u1251 \u1082 \u1089 \u1251 \u1085 2\
iikw	7r1	low tide		
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  iiw-, 
\f2\i the verbal counterpart of this base	
\f0\i0 tide, low												low tide		PY i$uk				ikw	xkw	\uc0\u1251 \u1082 \u1265 \
iilleq	7k]s2	slime		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 mud								check this; what could the base be?				slime; mud	nbyf. bk			Rub. 163		illeq	xlleq	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
iilngigh-	7k3b4-	lose a front tooth		iilngightuq \'91he lost a front tooth\'92; iilngighaa \'91he pulled her front tooth\'92 /	extract a front tooth												to lose or extract a front tooth		PE il&i3-				ilngigh-	xlngigh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
iilngiq	7k3b2	gap left by a lost tooth in the front of the mouth															gap left by a lost tooth in the front of the mouth		PE il&i3-				ilngiq	xlngiq	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
iilqayagute-	7k]2fzuens-	give up on		iilqayagutaa \'91he gave up on it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iilqayug-									from the examples for iggngiigmeng; check				to give up on				A&W 19		ilqayagute-	xlqayagute-	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iilqayug-	7k]2f/u-	give up (and quit)		iilqayugtuq \'91he gave up or was reluctant to continue\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he gave up hope\'92 / 	give up hope												to give up (and quit); to give up hope					iilqayugitate-, iilqayuke-	ilqayug-	xlqayug-	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 -\
iilqayugigate-	7k]2f/ubufns-	perseverant (be ~)															to be perseverant		< iilqayug-(ng)igate-				ilqayugigate-	xlqayugigate-	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iilqayuke-	7k]2f/rs-	lack faith in (it)		iilqayukaa \'91he doesn't have much faith in it\'92 / 													to lack faith in (it)		< iilqa-yug-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				ilqayuke-	xlqayuke-	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -\
iilqe-	7k]2s-	sad (become ~)		iilquq \'91he got sad\'92 / iilqutkaa \'91he got sad about it\'92													to become sad		PY ilut0q0- (under PE ilu)				ilqe-	xlqe-	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 -\
iilqupak	7k]2egfr	mucus from eye		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 iilquq													mucus from eye						ilqupak	xlqupak	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
iilquq	7k]2e2	brain		Esghaghhunguq uyghak taana 
\f2\i iilquvleghaghllaguyaghtuq.
\f0\i0  \'91You see, they say, there used to be a lot of 
\f2\i brain matter
\f0\i0  on that rock (where people would kill themselves).\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:166)													brain		PY-S il0quq			iilqwaaq	ilquq	xlquq	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
iilqwaaq	7k]2162	spinal cord															spinal cord		< iilquq-?-				ilqwaq	xlqwxq	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
iilvagh-	7kdf4-	honor		iilvaghaa \'91he elevated it\'92 /	elevate	hoist											to elevate; to honor; to hoist		+ PY ilva3- \'91to elevate\'92 (cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik Nunivak dialect ilva3- \'91to elevate\'92)				ilvagh-	xlvagh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1083 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iime-	7vs-	hollow (develop a ~)		iimuq \'91it developed a depression\'92 / iimtaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  iimestaa \'91he made a depression in it\'92, \'91he dented it\'92	depression (develop a ~)												to develop a hollow or depression		PY im0- and im0!-				ime-	xme-	\uc0\u1251 \u1084 \u1099 -\
iimgutaq	7vuenf2	tobacco pouch or similar rolled-up container															tobacco pouch or similar rolled-up container		< imeg-(u)taq				imgutaq	xmgutaq	\uc0\u1251 \u1084 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
iimna	7vyf	aforementioned one		
\f2\i obscured demonstrative pronoun; base is  
\f0\i0 im-; 
\f2\i relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 imum \'91(of) that one\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 iimkut \'91those\'92; 
\f2\i vocative: 
\f0\i0 Iimyuq \'91You (omnipresent but not visible; God)\'92 
\f2\i (used in some prayers);
\f0\i0  
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun:
\f0\i0  tazimna \'91that one\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 imani \'91there, at that place or time\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  imavek \'91to that place or time\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 imagun 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  iimgun \'91through that place or time\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb:
\f0\i0  imaken 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  iimken \'91from that place or time\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional: 
\f0\i0 ima there!; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb:
\f0\i0  tazimani \'91there, at that place or time\'92; tagitugmun pulaluni tazimavek igleghsimalghi \'91when he got in to fog, he just went in random directions\'92; iimken ima taakut liilightuusaagut \'91they are rules from before the present time\'92; naken imaken allgeghtaqaak ullghitagni \'91he got his snowmachine from some place\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ima, imukun	that one known to both speaker and listener	that one in an undetermined place away from here											that aforementioned one known to both speaker and listener; that one in an undetermined place away from here		PE dem. im-				imna	xmna	\uc0\u1251 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
iimnanguq	7vyf3e2	once upon a time		
\f2\i particle; traditional opening word of stories													
\f0\i0 once upon a time		< iimna=nguq				imnanguq	xmnanguq	\uc0\u1251 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
iimnga-	7v3f-	depression (have a ~ in it)		iimngauq \'91it has a depression in it\'92, \'91it is dented\'92													to have a depression in it		< iime-nga-				imnga-	xmnga-	\uc0\u1251 \u1084 \u1187 \u1072 -\
iimra	7vhf	solid matter in broth from boiled meat		
\f2\i the \'91slush, mud\'92  meaning may be Chukotkan only	
\f0\i0 mud	slush											solid matter in broth from boiled meat; slush; mud		from Chukchi ?	x			imra	xmra	\uc0\u1251 \u1084 \u1088 \u1072 \
Iingghilukaq	&34bk/rf2	Ittygran Island (site in Chukotka on ~)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka, on Ittygran Island		PE i&3i3		Men. 1972, 1975		ingghilukaq	xngghilukaq	\uc0\u1250 \u1187 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
iinghusalek	7y4eczksr	rule to ensure safety		
\f2\i Iinghusalguftuq
\f0\i0  wataghllak iiwhlanghani taan\'92gavek ateghyaqunaki pisqellelek, ulefqaghtekayuguniluku sukatepiglluni. \'91There was a 
\f2\i rule
\f0\i0  never to go down there when the tide was very low as then the tide came in it would come in very fast.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:236); Emta 
\f2\i iinghusalek
\f0\i0 , uglaneghmiininguq nenga ughumakayuguniluku piiqaat enkaam kelengasaalluni ayuquq. \'91There was a 
\f2\i hunting rule
\f0\i0  about them too because when there were lots of them together, the ice on which they had been roosting would thaw and get thin.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:134)													rule to ensure safety		< ineghte-(u)saq-lek				inghusalek	xnghusalek	\uc0\u1251 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
iinghute-	7y4ens-	warn		iinghutaa \'91he warned him\'92 /													to warn		< inegh-(u)te-				inghute-	xnghute-	\uc0\u1251 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iingkut	73ren	over there (those ~)		
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  iigna													those over there						ingkut	xngkut	\uc0\u1251 \u1187 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \
iinglu	73k/	semi-subterranian house, neighboring		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 neighboring semi-subterranian house	cjctlyzz ptvkzyrf	
\f2\i this may be a blend of 
\f0\i0 PE i&lu \'91complement, other of pair\'92, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  PE 0&lu \'91semi-subterranian house\'92		CK V & E 81		inglu	xnglu	\uc0\u1251 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \
iingqaghyagh-	732f4mz4-	catch by hooking			hooking (catch by ~)												to catch by hooking		< iingqaq-?-				ingqaghyagh-	xngqaghyagh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
iingqaq*	732f2	gum (anatomical)		iingqaghten \'91your gums\'92													gum (anatomical)		PE i&ki3				ingqaq*	xngqaq*	\uc0\u1251 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
iingqighte-	732b5ns-	stab through a sea mammal\'92s eye to kill it 		suvlugiilluku ayumiq ilangi teghikusam tawaten iingqighlluki tuqutaqegkangit \'91without (using) a gun on it, in the past they would kill some sea mammal like that by stabbing them through the eye\'92; neghsaq iingqighlluku tuqusimaa \'91he killed the seal by stabbing it through the eye\'92									check, explained as: ayumiq iiskun kaapluki tuqutelleq, which VK translates pretty much as here				to stab through a sea mammal\'92s eye to kill it 		< iingqaq-?- (?)		A&W 27		ingqighte-	xngqighte-	\uc0\u1251 \u1187 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iingqiq	732b2	louse nit			nit of louse												louse nit		PE i&qi3				ingqiq	xngqiq	\uc0\u1251 \u1187 \u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \
iingtaq	73nf2	moulted goose		iingtaghyaghtuq \'91he went hunting for moulted geese\'92	goose, moulted												moulted goose		< iingte-aq				ingtaq	xngtaq	\uc0\u1251 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
iingte-	73ns-	moult		iingtuq \'91it moulted\'92 /													to moulted		PY i&t0-				ingte-	xngte-	\uc0\u1251 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iingunagh-	73eyf4-	whole		
\f2\i used in the quantifier/qualifier construction;  
\f0\i0 iingunaan neghaqa \'91I ate it all\'92;
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 iingunaghmelnguq \'91the whole thing\'92; igleghtut iingunaghmeng \'91they all traveled\'92; ingunaghhaghmi kaatuq \'91every single one of them arrived\'92; Aghneq 
\f2\i iingunaan 
\f0\i0 qepghanemni, qenwat meghnughaqunga. \'91
\f2\i Every
\f0\i0  day when I work I am tired.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 68)	all	every							can one say iingunaghmi, iingunaghmeng etc.?				whole; all; every						ingunagh-	xngunagh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iinqe-	7y2s-	coo to a child		iinqaa \'91he cooed to him\'92 / iinqiiq \'91he cooed to someone\'92; iinqelluku iqengestaa \'91by cooing to him she made him smile\'92	say the customary made-up words, nonsense phrases, etc., used for that particular child to that child												to coo to a child; to say the customary made-up words, nonsense phrases, etc., used for that particular child to that child		PE in0q0-			iinqun	inqe-	xnqe-	\uc0\u1251 \u1085 \u1179 \u1099 -\
iinqisiq	7y2bcb2	customary made-up words spoken to a particular child		= iinqun	cooing words or song												the customary made-up words spoken to a particular child; cooing words or song		< iinqe-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				inqun	xnqun	\uc0\u1251 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
iinqun	7y2ey	customary made-up words spoken to a particular child		= iinqisiq	cooing words or song												the customary made-up words spoken to a particular child; cooing words or song		< iinqe-(u)n				inqun	xnqun	\uc0\u1251 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
Iintiyaghmii	&ynbz4v7	American Indian			Indian (American ~)												American Indian		from English \'91Indian\'92 with Yupik postbase -mii	SLI			Intiyaghmi	Xntiyaghmx	\uc0\u1250 \u1085 \u1090 \u1080 \u1103 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 \
iinwaaq	7y162	foothill		iinwaaghmun kaviiq mayughaghsan guutaa \'91when the fox went up the hillock he shot it\'92; iinwaaghmeng estumalghii \'91he slid down the little hill\'92	hillock								check, but looks okay				foothill; hillock		< inek-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		A&W 27		inwaq	xnwxq	\uc0\u1251 \u1085 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
iipgite-	7g[bns-	dull (be ~)		iipgilnguq \'91dull knife, needle, etc.\'92													to be dull		PE ip!it- (under ip0!-); < ipeg-(ng)ite-				ipgite-	xpgite-	\uc0\u1251 \u1087 \u1093 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iipkegsighwaagh-	7grs[cb4164-	jokes (tell ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 tell jokes												to tell jokes		< ipeg-?-		CK Rub 173		ipkegsighwagh-	xpkegsighwxgh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1087 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
iiqmig-	72vbu-	put something in the mouth without eating it		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 iqa													to put something in the mouth without eating it		PE iqmi!-				iqmig-	xqmig-	\uc0\u1251 \u1179 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
iiqmik	72vbr	mouth (something held inside the ~ in the cheek)			sugar cube												something held inside the mouth in the cheek; sugar cube		PE iqmi!-; < iqa\super e\nosupersub -mik				iqmik	xqmik	\uc0\u1251 \u1179 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
iiqwaq	721f2	walrus meat and skin aged in underground cellar															walrus meat and skin aged in underground cellar				VK		iqwaq	xqwaq	\uc0\u1251 \u1179 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
iiskak	7crfr	kidney		iiskagegka 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  iiskagenka \'91my kidneys\'92													kidney						iskak	xskak	\uc0\u1251 \u1089 \u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \
iiskegte-	7crs5ns-	eyes (have good ~)		
\f2\i Iiskegtekuvek
\f0\i0  iingunaghmi yugusin nighugllagullequq, iwernga iyellugmeskuvek iingunaghmi yugusin mamlegllagullequq. \'91If you 
\f2\i have good eyes
\f0\i0 , your entire body will be full of light, but if you have bad eyes your entire body will be full of darkness.\'92 (Matthew 6.22-23)	good eyesight (have ~)												to have good eyes, good eyesight		< iya\super e\nosupersub -kegte-				iskegte-	xskegte-	\uc0\u1251 \u1089 \u1082 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iiskughte-	7cre5ns-	guard		iiskughtaa \'91he is guarding it, he is watching out for her\'92 / iiskughtiiq \'91he is standing guard\'92	watch out for												to guard; to watch out for		PE 090k0- (under PE 090)			; > iiskughtista	iskughte-	xskughte-	\uc0\u1251 \u1089 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iiskughtista	7cre5nbcnf	watchman			guard												watchman; guard		< iiskughte-i\super 1\nosupersub -(s)ta				iskughtista	xskughtista	\uc0\u1251 \u1089 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
iisqaghmig-	7c2f4vbu-	put (it) on one\'92s shoulder		iisqaghmigaa \'91he put it on his shoulder\'92 /	shoulder (put (it) on one\'92s ~)												to put (it) on one's shoulder		< iisqaq-mig-			; > iisqaghmiitaq	isqaghmig-	xsqaghmig-	\uc0\u1251 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
iisqaghmiitaq	7c2f4v7nf2	yoke (as for carrying water in buckets)															yoke (as for carrying water in buckets)		< iisqaghmig-(u)taq				isqaghmitaq	xsqaghmxtaq	\uc0\u1251 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
iisqaq	7c2f2	shoulders (area of body around top of ~ and back of neck)		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 iisqak, 
\f2\i for that body area													
\f0\i0 area of body around top of shoulders and back of neck					> iisqaghmig-	isqaq	xsqaq	\uc0\u1251 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
iisqiighute-	7c274ens-	slump down		peng\'92gem elngaatall iisqiighutuq \'91he slumped down due to worry\'92	droop (let one\'92s shoulders ~)												to slump down; to let one\'92s shoulders droop		< iisqaq-(ng)i(gh)ute-				isqighute-	xsqxghute-	\uc0\u1251 \u1089 \u1179 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iisqugh-	7c2e4-	intimidated		
\f2\i emotional root; 
\f0\i0 iisqughyugtuq \'91he feels hesitant to look someone in the face, feels intimidated\'92; iisqughyukaa \'91he feels intimidated by him\'92; iisqughnaghtuq \'91he is feared, intimidating\'92; iisqughyughqaa \'91he made her feel intimidated\'92; mekelghiiq iisqughyugigalnguq ilani algumastekluni neghelghii \'91the boy ate without regarding the feelings of others and thus made his companions (who weren\'92t eating) covetous (of what he was eating)\'92; iisqughyugtaat ilangit esghapagtuulluku \'91they made him self-conscious when they stared at him\'92; aleni kayunneghisan iisquqaa \'91when his companion didn\'92t catch fish he was considerate of him (and gave him some fish)\'92	hesitant to look another in the eye	considerate of the feelings of others								self-conscious			intimidated; hesitant to look another in the eye; considerate of the feelings of others; self-conscious						isqugh-	xsqugh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
iisqughte-	7c2e5ns-	foreign object in one\'92s eye (get a ~)		iisqughtuq \'91he got something in his eye\'92 / aghnaghaghhaq iisqughtuq pagulameng \'91the little girl got dust in her eye\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iya													to get a foreign object in one's eye						isqughte-	xsqughte-	\uc0\u1251 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iisqughun	7c2e4ey	foreign object in eye		Sangan esghaghsigu yulgutegpek 
\f2\i iisqughutnga
\f0\i0 , elpek katam 
\f2\i iisqughuten
\f0\i0  unaghsighllak avelghaghluku? \'91Why do you notice the [tiny] 
\f2\i thing in the eye
\f0\i0  of your fellow person, while missing the 
\f2\i thing in your own eye
\f0\i0 , though it be a large piece of wood?\'92 (Matthew 7.3)													foreign object in eye		< iisqughte-(u)n				isqughun	xsqughun	\uc0\u1251 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
iitegngam	7nsu3fv	usually		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 iitegngam aqupileghyugnaanghituq \'91he usually doesn't feel obligated\'92	always	anyway											usually; always; anyway		< iitek=ngam				itegngam	xtegngam	\uc0\u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
iitek	7nsr	at least		
\f2\i particle; expresses mild assent after insistence or an adverse condition;
\f0\i0  iitek, taawa ataasiq nuluq \'91at least there is one teabag\'92; Pimakanga uyughani, "
\f2\i Iitek
\f0\i0  tazinga aghnangusimayaghamken.\'94 \'91She said to her younger brother, \'93
\f2\i At least 
\f0\i0 now I\'92ve found a woman for you.\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 160); Quyngim ivalungi amestaaghhaaluki qiipiluki tespagavek atuqaqut. Aghveghem pingi qayughllak ilangi, 
\f2\i iitek
\f0\i0  ilangi taaqegkayuget amestaaghhaaluki. \'91They used reindeer sinew making it into a thin thread. Whale sinew (was used) too, but 
\f2\i on the other hand
\f0\i0  it (the reindeer sinew) could be made thin.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGEGH. 1:96); Whanga liitellemni sangwaa maana maaten atughput ukavansaghtuq. 
\f2\i Iitek
\f0\i0  allgeghluni ayuquq, taawanginaq ukavanteftuq. \'91When I was gaining awareness, the kind of clothing we wear nowadays was scarce. It did come in 
\f2\i all right
\f0\i0 , but it was in short supply.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)	still	alright								but on the other hand			at least; sure; alright; still; but on the other hand		from Chukchi it0k \'91if; in reality\'92				itek	xtek	\uc0\u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
iitekqun, iitegqun	7nsr2ey\\ 7ns[2ey	perhaps		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 usually												perhaps; usually		< iitek=qun				itekqun, itegqun	xtekqun, xtegqun	\uc0\u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 ; \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
iitga	7n[f	crack at shore edge of shorefast ice caused by vertical movement of the floating ice		Tuvam ukani uughqan tungangani, laagha taakwna 
\f2\i iitgameng
\f0\i0  aatqeftuq. \'91Here, in the sheltered area of the shorefast ice, its water goes out from 
\f2\i the seaside lead.
\f0\i0 \'92 (SIKU. ESLA. ESGHA. 2004:32)	lead at shore edge of shorefast ice caused by vertical movement of the floating ice	sea ice type							check example to makes sure this is iitgameng and not iitganeng, which would make this merely and inflected form of itek				crack or lead at shore edge of shorefast ice caused by vertical movement of the floating ice		< itek-?				itga	xtga	\uc0\u1251 \u1090 \u1093 \u1072 \
iitghiitaq	7n57nf2	pole located above bed-curtain in winter traditional house 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				pole located above bed-curtain in winter traditional house 	,hec d dth[e pfyfdtcf d gjkjut pbvytq zhfyub.;thlm	< itegh-?-(u)taq		Rub. 177		itghitaq	xtghxtaq	\uc0\u1251 \u1090 \u1203 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
iitghute-	7n5ens-	bring in forcefully															to bring in forcefully		< itegh-(u)te-				itghute-	xtghute-	\uc0\u1251 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iitqiinagh-	7n27yf4-	drop in (as for a short visit)		temngi iitqiinaghlunga piinga \'91I just came in for a short visit\'92; aatkani aghipalnguut iitqiinaghluni mataghqughii \'91he took off his wet clothes as soon as he came in\'92	visit (just drop in for a short ~)												to just drop in (as for a short visit)		< itegh-qagh-(ng)inagh-				itqinagh-	xtqxnagh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1090 \u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iitugh-	7ne4-	dig with intensity		
\f2\i Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0 iitughtuq \'91he really dug\'92; iitughaa \'91he really dug it\'92 / = iigtugh-													to dig with intensity		< iigge-?- (?)				itugh-	xtugh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
iivagh-	7df4-	fade away in the distance		Naayghaghhaq sukalluni aliighaqsalghii, imanguq aywaaghhneghani 
\f2\i iivaghaqelghii
\f0\i0 . \'91They could see the Gambell mountain grow bigger (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , rapidly become visible), but when the north wind came up, they would see the mountain 
\f2\i shrink
\f0\i0  again.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:118); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iivani													to fade away in the distance						ivagh-	xvagh-	\uc0\u1251 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iivani	7dfyb	limit (in the area at the ~ one\'92s hearing)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 yugayu iivanlluni qalghiitiiq \'91the loon sang a song from afar\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iivagh-	afar	distance (in the far ~)											in the area at the limit of one's hearing; afar; in the far distance						ivani	xvani	\uc0\u1251 \u1074 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
Iivgaaq	&du62	Sireniki in Chukotka (site near ~)		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka near Sireniki				from Men. 1972, 1975		ivgaq	xvgxq	\uc0\u1250 \u1074 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 \
iivghaan	7d46y	spectacled eider			eider, spectacled	
\f2\i Somateria fischeri											
\f0\i0 spectacled eider
\f2\i  (Somateria fischeri)						
\f0\i0 ivghan	xvghxn	\uc0\u1251 \u1074 \u1271 \u257 \u1085 \
iiw-	71-	low tide (for tide to go down)		iiwhtuq \'91the tide went down\'92; iikwan aghvighllequkut \'91we'll cross when the tide gets low\'92; Iinghusalguftuq wataghllak 
\f2\i iiwhlanghani
\f0\i0  taan\'92gavek ateghyaqunaki pisqellelek, ulefqaghtekayuguniluku sukatepiglluni. \'91There was a rule never to go down there when the 
\f2\i tide was very low 
\f0\i0 as when the tide came in it would come in very fast.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:236); 
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  iikw; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 iighwte-	tide goes down												for tide to go down		PY-S i$uk				iw-	xw-	\uc0\u1251 \u1265 -\
iiwen	71sy	just when		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 iiwen aghsaghtughaqaa, sama angyat kaateqeghsimalghiit \'91just when it was close to morning, the boat finally came\'92; saaftegpenaan, iiwen aghyughlleqamken \'91don't touch it or else I'll punish you\'92; iiwenllu tengegkayuget kaasaghtughaqut tagitugughtaa \'91just when the plane was about to arrive it got foggy\'92; akuwaaghhaaneng iiwen unugaqaa igaqenka taaqegpenaki \'91since the other day once again it became night before I could finish my paperwork\'92; Maaten liisalghiinga, Tapghaaghaghqun, 
\f2\i iiwen
\f0\i0  siqineq tevighyaghtuughaquq tamlagtukut. \'91Then, as I\'92ve learned, 
\f2\i just when
\f0\i0  the sun was about to set we beached at Tapghaaghaq.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGEGH. 2:162); 
\f2\i Iiwen
\f0\i0 , Qateghyiighaghhaay, meghtanghilkuvek, ighsakuvek, tuqulluten, gaaghluten, neghelleqamken. \'91
\f2\i Or else, 
\f0\i0 little birdy, if you don\'92t fetch water, if you refuse, then after killing you and cooking you I\'92ll eat you.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 32)	once again	subsequently								or else			just when; once again; subsequently; then; also; still; or else		from Chukchi ew0r \'91it appears so; already\'92			: > iiwenllu, iiwenqun	iwen	xwen	\uc0\u1251 \u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \
iiwenllu	71syk]/	just when		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0   
\f2\i Iiwenllu
\f0\i0  quulngughutanga aghneq lliighaquq naayghamun qaygeghsimalghiit. \'91And 
\f2\i just then when
\f0\i0  it became noon they got the top of the mountain.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 23)	when (just ~)												just when		< iiwen=llu				iwenllu	xwenllu	\uc0\u1251 \u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
iiwenngam	71sy3fv	if it is so		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 if it is so		< iiwen-ngam		VK		iwenngam	xwenngam	\uc0\u1251 \u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
iiwenqun	71sy2ey	just when		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 when (just ~)												just when		< iiwen=qun				iwenqun	xwenqun	\uc0\u1251 \u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
iiwleng	71ks3	every time		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0   tagineghmini iiwleng nenglaghtaqiinkut \'91every time he comes over he makes us laugh\'92; taana iiwleng kinguteghllak \'91he is always very late\'92; tagiiqelghii uksustaghhiinaghmi iiwleng \'91he comes only in winter all the time\'92; Liilightuusaq taana, uyiiteng quunpeng uughqan tunganganilluki 
\f2\i iiwleng
\f0\i0  pisqellelget. Qayughllak ayumiq nanghiiqaalghiit, yuget ayveghmun nusugniiqiit uyiighqun iglakaqat. \'91That law is that the harpoon rope must be on the south side 
\f2\i at all times.
\f0\i0  Because they experienced it long ago, they said men who have become entangled by the rope were pulled into the water.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:128); 
\f2\i Iiwleng
\f0\i0  upenghaanneghagu pangeghtaqelghiikut. \'91
\f2\i All the time,
\f0\i0  when it became spring, we would go to Chukotka.\'92 (PANGEGH. 48)	all the time	always								repeatedly			every time; all the time; always; repeatedly	dctulf. gjcnjzyyj. j,sxyj	from Chukchi iwlet0k \'91stretch, extend\'92				iwleng	xwleng	\uc0\u1251 \u1265 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \
iiyaq	7z2	ventilator		aagram iiyaa \'91ventilator in the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , the inner room of traditional Chukchi-style Eskimo house\'92; Atalgukaghaan aghnneghani 
\f2\i iiyaa
\f0\i0  qelpeghlluku aaptaqegkanga, "Unguvaaghaqsiin?" \'91Whenever dawn came his little cousin would open its 
\f2\i ventilator
\f0\i0  and ask him, \'93Are you still alive?\'94 (AYUM. UNGIP. III:18)	air vent												ventilator; air vent						iyaq	xyaq	\uc0\u1251 \u1103 \u1179 \
iiyngite-	7q3bns-	eyeless (be ~)			blind (be ~)												to be eyeless; to be blind		< iye-(ng)ite-				iyngite-	xyngite-	\uc0\u1251 \u1253 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iiyvaraak	7qdfh6r	hollow sick eyes			eyes (hollow sick ~ or one with hollow sick ~)												hollow sick eyes; one with hollow sick eyes		< iye-?-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 iyvarak	xyvarxk	\uc0\u1251 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
ikavziiq	brfdp72	stitch type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 type of stitch				see SLI Cur. Res. Man. 85		ikavziq	ikavzxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1079 \u1251 \u1179 \
ikayugh-	brf/4-	respond (positively) to		ikayughaa \'91he responded to her\'92 /	go along or agree with	help											to respond (positively) to; to go along or agree with; to help						ikayugh-	ikayugh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 -\
ikayuqu-	brf/-	helpful (be ~)		anengani ullghitangllalghii ikayuqwaa \'91he helped his brother who was working on the snow-machine\'92; navek pinalutek aleni ikayuqwaa \'91he helped his friend so that they could go somewhere\'92; luuraq salguyaaghtuq ikayuquteggu \'91maybe he\'92s got something going on with him; help him\'92	help												to help; to be helpful						ikayuqu-	ikayuqu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1102 -\
ike-	brs-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > iike-, ikelleq, ikugh-, ikute-, ikuvike-																			ike-	ike-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
ikelleq, iikelleq	brsk]s2. 7rsk]s2	fragment of ice, meat, etc.															fragment of ice, meat, etc.		< ike-lleq, iike-lleq				ikelleq, ikelleq	ikelleq, xkelleq	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 , \u1251 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
ikevaaneq	brsd6ys2	south wind, prolonged			wind (prolonged south ~)												prolonged south wind		< ikevaq-?-				ikevaneq	ikevxneq	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
ikevaghlluk	brsdf5k]/r	south			southeast	south wind								southeast wind			south; southeast; south wind; southeast wind		< ikevaq-ghlluk				ikevaghlluk	ikevaghlluk	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
ikevaq	brsdf2	south			southeast	south wind								southeast wind			south; southeast; south wind; southeast wind					> ikevaaneq, ikevreghaak	ikevaq	ikevaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
ikevreghaak	brsdhs46r	southward current			current, southward												southward current		< ikevaq-?-				ikevreghak	ikevreghxk	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1082 \
ikfiqe-	brab2s-	pain (have intense ~)		ikfiquq \'91he is in great pain\'92; ikfiqutkaa \'91he is anguished over it\'92  
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he really longs for her\'92 / ikfiqumalghii \'91one who has been having physical or mental pain, or has been in need\'92	anguish (feel ~)	anxious								long for or miss another			to have intense pain; to feel anguish; to be anxious; to long for or miss another		PE ikvi!-			; > ikfiqnaghhalek	ikfiqe-	ikfiqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ikfiqnaghhalek	brab2y]f5fksr	anxiety provoking!		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 awesome!	wonderful!											how anxiety provoking!; how awesome!; how wonderful!		<ikviqe-naq-ghhalek				ikfiqnaghhalek	ikfiqnaghhalek	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
iki	brb	impossible!		
\f2\i Chukotkan(R);
\f0\i0   iki umegneghmi aghulaqegpenang, iflalngwaaghllequten \'91see (negative), don\'92t leave in the storm, you will get lost\'92	no (under ~ circumstances)								check				impossible!; in no circumstances	ytkmpz. yt ye;yj. yb d rjtv ckexft 			Rub. 149		iki	iki	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \
ikigh-	brb4-	open		
\f2\i postural root;  
\f0\i0 ikightuq \'91it opened\'92; ikightaa \'91he opened it\'92; ikighngaaq it is open\'92; ikighmi \'91(it) being open\'92													open		PE iki3-			> ikighllineq	ikigh-	ikigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ikighllineq	brb5k]bys2	opening in ice pushed up in pressure ridge or in the ground		
\f2\i see item 17 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	crevice in sea ice	cave or gully											opening in ice pushed up in pressure ridge or in the ground; crevice in sea ice; cave; gully		< ikigh-?-neq\super 2				\nosupersub ikighllineq	ikighllineq	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
ikiifsin	br7acby	at last		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 ikiifsin aglaghyaghtughtuq \'91at last he's about to go home\'92; 
\f2\i Ikiifsinnguq
\f0\i0  nemnni samani Sivuqaghhaghmi tawaten uniiliqeghllagluta qutengeqaghhnemta taghyiighaqsaghtukut. \'91Down in Gambell, when we 
\f2\i finally
\f0\i0  came ashore after a long ordeal at sea, we would remove the salt.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:126)	finally												at last; finally		from Chukchi \'93eke\'92upcI\'94 \'91and now, but now\'92				ikifsin	ikxfsin	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1251 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \
ikiite-	br7ns-	disappear (of a person)		ayumiq navek piluteng navengiighhaqlu aviitngwaaqat ikiinniiqegkangit \'91in olden days they would say of those who had gone somewhere far away and just vanished, that they had disappeared\'92; naqam ilangi naten uteghniqayuget ikiitkat \'91sometimes the ones who disappeared would return somehow\'92									check; explained as: saam imum sangughulluki tazimantekat, which VK glosses as \'91in the old belief of people who had gone somewhere in the wilderness or sea and not returned, because some mysterious being kept them from coming back\'92 -- what is \'93sangughulluki\'94 ? (cf. CAY cangu- \'91to turn back\'92)				to disappear (of a person)				A&W 27		ikite-	ikxte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ikiki	brbrb	no (under ~ circumstances)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle	
\f0\i0 not (one should ~)												under no circumstances; one should not  	vt;l>. dshf;f/ott cnhjujt gjdtktybt cvjnhb, ytkmpz-ytkmpz. yb d rjtv ckexft			Rub. 150		ikiki	ikiki	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \
ikiqun	brb2ey	but yet, but already, but on the other hand		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Whaten igaghyami 
\f2\i ikiqun
\f0\i0  uglaghllak whangkuta teacher-kegkaqenghilkefut. Nulighqutiinalghiit. Maatenllu 
\f2\i teacher
\f0\i0 -eghllagughlleghhii. \'91
\f2\i But
\f0\i0  when we were going to school, there were so many of us students who had just a teacher and his wife. Right now, there are many teachers in the school.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:96); Taawa tesamani tepluni angyaghpallugem ingluvingha. Taawa quuguluni qalqalimaqulleghtuftuq. Quukluku taana. Tamaa telaanangam sangi, napaghyii sanighyaghwaaghi. 
\f2\i Ikiqun
\f0\i0  quyngighqwaaghet angaghquqaqeftiit. 
\f1\b \'91
\f0\b0 There, the great big old ship\'92s wreckage washed ashore. There was wood that they chopped. It was used for firewood, the sail halyards and masts. 
\f2\i But already,
\f0\i0  the reindeer herders had been hauling it away.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)	and still yet	but wait until											but yet; but already; but on the other hand; and still yet; but wait until; but already		< iki(ki)=qun (?)				ikiqun	ikiqun	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
ikivaaneq	brbdfys2	south wind, slight 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 wind (slight south ~)												slight south wind 				CK Rub 149		ikivaneq	ikivxneq	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
ikiwan	brb1fy	if they can or if it can happen to them (then we could or it could happen to us)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Naagumi ikiwan qaaynganilnguum nateghqameggnun angighhutaqegkanginkut. \'91
\f2\i Even
\f0\i0  us he rubs onto sole material from above [as if we were dirt].\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 43); Whangkutallu taakut 
\f2\i ikiwan
\f0\i0  aklungilnguut, Tanengankut. \'91Our (hosts) too 
\f2\i even they 
\f0\i0 were pretty well off, Tanenga and family\'92 (PANGEGH. 8)	can happen to others too	even them/him											if they can or if it can happen to them (then we could or it could happen to us); it can happen to others too; even them/him		from Chukchi ikiwen \'91even\'92				ikiwan	ikiwan	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \
iklagrugte-	brk]zuhe[ns-	clear up somewhat		esla iklagrugtaa \'91the weather has cleared up somewhat; taghnughhaghmi gginaa ikloagrugtaa \'91she tidied up her baby\'92s face\'92	clean somewhat												to be somewhat clear up; to clean somewhat		< iklagte-?-		VK		iklagrugte-	iklagrugte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iklagte-	brk]z[ns-	clean (remove dirt)		aatkami ilangi iklagtii iqangi aghvigluki \'91she cleaned some of her clothing washing it\'92; iigmi aawi iklaglluki alla peghhinqigtuq \'91she wiped the blood from her hands and then wiped them again\'92	wash	tidy up							check, but looks okay				to clean; to wash; to tidy up				A&W 27		iklagte-	iklagte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iklungigh-	brk]/3b4-	insure			safeguard												to insure; to safeguard				CK Rub 150		iklungigh-	iklungigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
iknaqe-	bry]f2s-			iknaquq \'91he or it is strong\'92 / iknaqsugnetun \'91with a strong will\'92													to be strong (in any sense)						iknaqe-	iknaqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
iknaqsuugte-	bry]f2c0[ns-	stronger (feel ~ after an illness; act as if one is ~ than others)															to feel stronger after an illness; to act as if one is stronger than others		< iknaqe-?-				iknaqsugte-	iknaqsxgte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iknaqughi-	bry]f2e4b-	stronger (become stronger)		Elngaatall Pinaayam 
\f2\i iknaqughiniyaghaa
\f0\i0  taana Petgenghhaq. \'91Pinaaya said that that Petgenghhaq was 
\f2\i becoming very strong
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:10)													to become stronger		< iknaqe-ugh-(gh/l)i-				iknaqugh-	iknaqugh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 -\
iksaak	brc9r	ice creeper		
\f2\i Chukotka (R); made of bone or metal; cf. 
\f0\i0 kiksak	creeper (ice ~)												ice creeper				CK Rub 151		iksak	iksxk	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
iksiin	brc7y	strap for attaching  ice creeper to footwear		
\f2\i Chukotka (R)									
\f0\i0 < iksaak-(u)n				strap ice creeper to footwear				CK Rub 151		iksin	iksxn	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1089 \u1251 \u1085 \
iksiisigh-	brc7cb4-	attach ice creeper to footwear		
\f2\i Chukokan (R)									
\f0\i0 check this -- \'93horse-shoe\'94 ??\\/; probably should be iiksiisigh-; we have iiksiin \'91bracelet (Siberian)\'92; >From iksaagek, I found out it is actually shoes, CK				to attach ice creeper to footwear	ghbdzpsdfnm htvtijr r gjlrjdrt			Rub. 151		iksisigh-	iksxsigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1089 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ikufkagh-	brearf4-	cut (quickly or immediately ~ off a small piece)															to quickly cut off a small piece; to cut off a small piece immediately		< ikugh-?-				ikufkagh-	ikufkagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ikufkaq	brearf2	small piece that has been cut off			piece, small, that has been cut off												small piece that has been cut off		< ikugh-?-				ikufkaq	ikufkaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
ikugh-	bre4-	remove		ikughtuq \'91it removed things, he cut off pieces\'92; ikughaa \'91he removed it\'92 /	cut off												to remove; to cut off		< ike-ugh-				ikugh-	ikugh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 -\
ikumla-	brevkz-	okay (be ~)		ikumlallghaneng unaghsim saghnalta quugkameng \'91let\'92s gather the most suitable wood as firewood\'92; ikumlalleghqek ullghitagma enraq naavuk \'91my better snow-machine broke\'92	acceptable (be ~)	suitable (be ~)							check esp. to see if the base is as here or ikumlagh- ??; given as: seghleghunghilnguq itagnalghii, which VK translates as above				to be okay; to be acceptable; to be suitable				A&W 27		ikumla-	ikumla-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 -\
ikute-	brens-	cut off a piece (for)		ikutaa \'91he cut off a piece for her \'91/													to cut off a piece (for)						ikute-	ikute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ikuvike-	bredbrs-	cut off a piece (from)		ikuvikaa \'91he cut off a piece from it\'92 /													to cut off a piece (from)		< ike-?-vik-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				ikuvike-	ikuvike-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
ikuyegmig-	breqsuvbu-	bump or nudge with one\'92s elbow		ikuyegmigaa \'91he bumped or nudged her with his elbow\'92 /													to bump or nudge with one's elbow		< ikuyek-mik				ikuyegmig-	ikuyegmig-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
ikuyegtaagh-	breqs[n64-	lean on one\'92s elbow		ikuyegtaaghtuq \'91he leaned on his elbow\'92 /													to lean on one's elbow		 < ikuyek-?-				ikuyegtagh-	ikuyegtxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
ikuyegvike-	breqsudbrs-	put one's elbow on (it)		ikuyegvikaa \'91he put his elbow on it\'92 /													to put one's elbow on (it)		< ikuyek-vik-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				ikuyegvike-	ikuyegvike-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1075 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
ikuyek	breqsr	elbow		ikuska \'91my elbow\'92; ikuygegka \'91my elbows\'92													elbow		PE ikuy0!			ikuyegmig-, ikuyegtaagh-, ikuyegvike-	ikuyek	ikuyek	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1082 \
Ikuygek	Brequsr	Ikoygak Cr. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Ikoygak Cr. on St. Lawrence Is.		< ikuyek-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 Ikuygek	Ikuygek	\uc0\u1048 \u1082 \u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1099 \u1082 \
ikwaaqu	br162e	crosswind (stronger wind coming off cliffs or high mountains when a wind blows against them)		anuqmi ikwaaqum repall qawaaget meghmun ifkaghtaqii tengaalghiit \'91in the wind a crosswind with force makes the flying birds fall into the water\'92; ikwaaqum pennani repall meq pightuquqluku \'91the crosswind at the cliffs forcefully acts on the water like a blizzard\'92									check, explained as: anuqa atghaghtaatalghii pennani nalighmeng naayghaneng paagkemeng, which VK translates as above				crosswind (stronger wind coming off cliffs or high mountains when a wind blows against them)				A&W 27		ikwaqu	ikwxqu	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \
ikwegte-	br1s[ns-	scratch long on the face		taghnughhaam ilani gginaakun ikwegsimakanga \'91the child scratched his companion on the face\'92; nulighhan yuuk qungyaghluni ikwegsimaa \'91the man got jealous and scratched his wife on the face\'92									check, but looks okay, explained as: pakin\'92gulleq				to scratch (long) on the face				A&W 28		ikwegte-	ikwegte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1082 \u1265 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ila	bkz	part of		yugem qikmiin ilangat \'91one of the man\'92s dogs\'92; yugem qikmiin ilangit \'91some of the man\'92s dogs\'92; ilanka \'91my relatives\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91my group\'92; mangtegham ilanga \'91part of the house\'92	relative or friend	some of								one of			part; relative; friend; one of; some of		PE ila(-)\super 1			\nosupersub ilakaghqaq, ilakumtaaq, ilakwaaq, ilaligh-, lialiigh-, ilamghi-, ilangakun, ilangani, ilapga-, ilaaq, ilate-	ila	ila	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \
ila-	bkz-	add something to (it)		ilaa \'91he added something to it\'92													to add something to (it)		PE ila(-)\super 1				\nosupersub ila-	ila-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 -\
ilaagh-	bk94-	patch		ilaaghaa \'91he patched it\'92 / ilaaghiiq \'91he patched something\'92													to patch		PE ila(C)a3 (under PE ila(-)\super 1\nosupersub )				ilagh-	ilxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
ilaaq	bk92	patch															patch		PE ila(C)a3 (under PE ila(-)\super 1\nosupersub ); < ila-?-				ilaq	ilxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
ilagaan	bkzu6y	hymn			shaman's song	song											hymn; song; shaman's song		< ilagagh-(u)n				ilagan	ilagxn	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u257 \u1085 \
ilagaatet	bkzu6nsn	hymnal			songs	record (phonograph ~)								CD			hymnal; songs; phonograph record; CD		< ilagaan-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 ilagatet	ilagxtet	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \
ilagagh-	bkzuf4-	sing		ilagaghtuq \'91he sang\'92 / ilagaataa \'91he sang to her\'92; ilagaatkaa \'91he sang about it\'92													to sing		PE ila!a3- (under PE ila(-)\super 1\nosupersub )				ilagagh-	ilagagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ilakaghqaq	bkzrf52f2	added (something to be ~)			included (something to be ~)												something to be added or included		< ila-kaghqaq				ilakaghqaq	ilakaghqaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
ilakumtaaq	bkzrevn62	friend															friend		< ila-qumtaaq				ilakumtaq	ilakumtxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
ilakwaaq	bkzr162	clan member			kinsman	member of the same group											clan member; kinsman; member of the same group		< ila-ke\super 1\nosupersub -(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				ilakwaq	ilakwxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
ilaligh-	bkzkb4. 	supplement															to supplement		< ila-ligh-				ilaligh-	ilaligh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 ,\
ilaliigh-	bkzk74-	make friends		ilaliighaa \'91he made friends with him\'92 / ilaliighutuq \'91he became friends (with them)\'92	friends (make ~)												to make friends		PE ilali(C)u3- (under PE il(a)\super 1\nosupersub ); < ila-liigh-				ilaligh-	ilalxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
ilamghi-	bkzv4b-	want more		ilamghiiq \'91he wants more\'92 / ilamghitkaa \'91he wants more of it\'92	more (want ~)												to want more		< ila-?-				ilamghi-	ilamghi-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1084 \u1271 \u1080 -\
ilangakun	bkz3frey	sometimes		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 sometimes		< ila-
\f2\i possessed vialis				
\f0\i0 ilangakun	ilangakun	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
ilangani	bkz3fyb	meanwhile		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 some of the time												meanwhile; some of the time		PE ila&a(t)ni (under PE ila(-)\super 1\nosupersub )
\f2\i ;
\f0\i0  < ila-
\f2\i possessed localis				
\f0\i0 ilangani	ilangani	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
ilangghama-	bkz346vf-	good-natured (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				be good-natured	,snm lj,hjleiysv	< ila-?-		Rub. 162		ilangghama-	ilangghama-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1271 \u257 \u1084 \u1072 -\
ilangghiite-	bkf347ns-	talk (not ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)									
\f0\i0 Check				to not talk	yt hfpujdfhbdfnm	< ila-?-(ng)ite-		V & E 142; Rub 162		ilangghite-	ilangghxte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ilangqughqu-	bkz32e52e-	get ice to melt for water		ilangqughquuq \'91he got ice to melt for water\'92 /													to get ice to melt for water		< ilangquq-ghqu-				ilangqughqu-	ilangqughqu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 -\
ilangqughrag-	bkz32e4hfu-	coated or covered (get ~ with ice)		ilangqughragtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ilangqughragaa \'91it got coated or covered with ice\'92 /	ice (get coated or covered with ~)												to get coated or covered with ice		< ilangquq-?				ilangqughrag-	ilangqughrag-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1075 -\
ilangqughrak	bkz32e4hfr	ice coating			coating of ice												coating of ice		< ilangquq-?-				ilangqughrak	ilangqughrak	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
ilangqughsiigh-	bkz32e5c74-	get ice to melt for water		ilangqughsiightuq \'91he is getting or chipping ice to make water\'92 / ilangqughsiighyaghnaqunga naayvamun \'91I\'92m going to the lake to get ice for making water\'92	ice (get ~ to melt for water)												to get ice to melt for water		< ilangquq-?-				ilangqughsigh-	ilangqughsxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
ilangquq	bkz32e2	ice (clear chunk of fresh-water ~)		ilangqughregaq \'91small chunk of fresh-water ice\'92													clear chunk of fresh-water ice		PE nila!				ilangquq	ilangquq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
ilangsiniigh-	bkz3cby74-	look for more		angyat ilangsiniighumaghmeng kelutmiighhlluteng alla ayveghaghlaataghtut \'91the boat went out hunting for walrus looking for more\'92; ilangsiniighnaqem muluughtukut \'91on account of being about to look for more, we stayed out longer\'92	try to get more												to look for more; to try to get more				A&W 28		ilangsinigh-	ilangsinxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
ilapga-	bkzg[f-	comply with		ilapgaa \'91he responded to him\'92 / ilapgatuq \'91he is responding\'92	respond to	help											to comply with; to respond to; to help		< ila-?-				ilapga-	ilapga-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1087 \u1093 \u1072 -\
ilaraagh-	bkzh94-	stretch the news		ungipaq qenwat ilaraaghem allaanghughsimaaq \'91on account of exaggeration the news was altered\'92; ilaraaghnguq pininghituq \'91exaggeration is not good\'92	exaggerate								check; explained as: ungipat sangwaat akuzillghet allaneneng ikakat, which VK glosses as \'91stretching news a little far\'92				to stretch the news; to exaggerate				A&W 28		ilaragh-	ilarxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1088 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
ilarngughte-	bkzh3e5ns-	reduce something		usikaghqaghten ilarngughhnaqanka uglaapigtut \'91your load is too much so I\'92ll lesson it\'92; angyam megha ilarngughlluku kuuvnakesi \'91bail out some of the water from the boat\'92	lesson								check; explained as: ilakelli, which VK translates as \'91reducing something\'92				to reduce something; to lesson				A&W 28		ilarngughte-	ilarngughte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1088 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ilataa-	bkzn6-	join with others		tengegkayugkun ifkalghiikun ilataamalghii \'91he joined the others who went by plane\'92; Ungazightatgun ilataaguq \'91he had joined the group that went to Chaplino\'92	go along												to join with others; to go along		< ilate-?-		AYW 28		ilata-	ilatx-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1090 \u257 -\
ilate-	bkzns-	add in		ilatuq \'91he joined in\'92; ilataa \'91he added it in\'92 / ilatutut \'91they joined the others\'92; ilatutuutut \'91they joined together\'92; ilatkaq \'91someone or something added in\'92	join in												to add in; to join in		PE ilat0- (under ila(-)\super 1\nosupersub ); < ila-(u)te-				ilate-	ilate-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ilefkaate-	bksfr6ns-	loose (come ~ (from being tied))		qikmiq ilefkaatuq \'91the dog got loose\'92													to come loose (from being tied)		< ileme-kagh-(u)te-				ilefkate-	ilefkxte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1072 \u1082 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ilefkaghagh-	bksarf4f4-	undone (suddenly come ~)		nagtuqaa atkuyaaghan ilefkaghaghtuq \'91the button on her dress suddenly came off\'92	off (suddenly come ~)												to suddenly come undone or off		< ileme-kagh-?-				ilefkaghagh-	ilefkaghagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ileme-	bksvs-	undone (come ~)		ilemuq \'91it came undone\'92 / ilemtaa \'91he undid it\'92; = iteme-	untied (come ~)	come undone or untied											to come undone; to come untied		PE it0m0-		Rub. 157	ilefkaghagh-	ileme-	ileme-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 -\
ilemquusiq	bksv28cb2	screwdriver			awl, bent								check				screwdriver; bent awl	jndthnrf. cdfqrf \'f8bpjuyenjt ibkj\uc0\u960 	< ileme-te\super 1\nosupersub -qugh-(u)siq		Rub. 157		ilemqusiq	ilemqxsiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1084 \u1179 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ilepenghaaq	bksgsy462	membrane (inner) of walrus or bearded seal intestine		ighneghllugem ilepenghaaghi kelighaghaqii \'91she is scraping off the inner membrane of the intestine\'92	intestine (inner membrane of walrus or bearded seal ~)								check, but looks good; explained as: qilum ilulighneghan kelillghi				inner membrane of walrus or bearded seal intestine				A&W 28		ilepenghaq	ilepenghxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \
ilepesuwaq	bksgsc/1f2	layer		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 layer		< ilu-? (?)		CK Rub 158		ilepesuwaq	ilepesuwaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
ilepghaaghek 	bksgu564sr	pants of reindeer-skin with fur side in															pants of reindeer-skin with the fur side in		PE ilup03(a3) (under PE ilu)< ilu-?-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 ilepghaghek 	ilepghxghek 	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1087 \u1075 \u1203 \u257 \u1271 \u1099 \u1082 \
ilghaghteq	bk4f5ns2	walrus sleeping in water on its back		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 walrus sleeping in water on its back				CK Rub 157		ilghaghteq	ilghaghteq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \
ilighaq	bkb4f2	patch put inside sole of boot loosely															patch put inside sole of boot loosely						ilighaq	ilighaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ilu	bk/	inside		ilungani \'91inside it\'92	heart (figuratively)	inner organs								inner feelings			inside; interior; inner organs; inner feelings; heart (figuratively)		PE ilu				ilu	ilu	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \
ilu-	bk/-	flare up (of lamp, fire in stove, etc.)		nanim kengha iluuq \'91the fire in the seal oil lamp flared up\'92													to flare up (of lamp, fire in stove, etc.)				VL		ilu-	ilu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 -\
ilughaq*	bk/4f2	cross-cousin		iluuq \'91hey, cousin!\'92 (q.v.)	cousin (cross ~)												father's sister's or mother's brother's child; cross-cousin; buddy		PE illu3(a3); < ilu-ghaq				ilughaq*	ilughaq*	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ilughasaghaq	bk/4fcz4f2	cousin															cousin		< ilughaq-?		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 146		ilughasaghaq	ilughasaghaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ilughwaghniighute-	bk/41f4y74ens-	tease each other (between cross-cousins)		ilughaqullghiit ilughwaghniighunneghtughllagyalghiit maaten pipagnanightut \'91cross-cousins used to tease each other often, but now it\'92s rarely done\'92													to tease each other (between cross-cousins)				Kallag. 105		ilughwaghnighute-	ilughwaghnxghute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ilukegte-	bk/rs[ns-	considerate (be a ~ person)			pleasant (be a ~)												to be a considerate and pleasant person		< ilu-kegte-				ilukegte-	ilukegte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ilukliq*	bk/rk]b2	inner part															inner part		< ilu-qliq				ilukliq*	ilukliq*	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
ilulighaq	bk/kb4f2	ice drifting on the inward side of the pack ice		
\f2\i see item 18 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	cake of ice (medium-size ~ in open water but with similar cakes nearby)	sea ice type											drifting ice on the inward side of the pack ice; medium-size cake of ice in open water but with similar cakes nearby		PE ilul(l)i3a3 (under PE ilu); < ilu-liq-ghaq				ilulighaq	ilulighaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
iluliq, ilulighneq	bk/kb2. bk/kb4ys2	inner part			seam												inside part; seam		< ilu-liq, ilu-lighneq				iluliq, ilulighneq	iluliq, ilulighneq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 , \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
iluliqe-	bk/kb2s-	heart trouble (have ~)															to have heart trouble		< ilu-liqe-				iluliqe-	iluliqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ilulliqe-	bk/k]b2s-	bad mood (be in a very ~)		ilulliquq \'91he is in a very bad mood\'92 /	angry (be ~)												to be in a very bad mood; to be angry		< ilu-lliqe-				ilulliqe-	ilulliqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ilulluk	bk/k]/r	bad-tempered person															bad-tempered person		< ilu-lluk				ilulluk	ilulluk	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
ilulnguq*	bk/k3e2	expensive thing		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 precious thing												expensive thing; precious thing	ljhjujq	< ilu-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -nguq		CK V & E 129		ilulnguq*	ilulnguq*	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
ilumigh-	bk/vb4-	snack		ilumiqaghluta angyaghhaakut \'91let\'92s go out boating after we snack\'92; ilumiitkaghqameng gaaghi sameng \'91cook something to have as a snack\'92									check; explained as: aqsaqughiitiq, which VK translates as above				to snack		< ilu-?		A&W 28		ilumigh-	ilumigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ilumik	bk/vbr	embryo			fetus	unborn child											embryo; fetus; unborn child		< ilu-mik				ilumik	ilumik	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
ilumike-	bk/vbrs-	dear (hold ~)		ilumikaa \'91he holds him dear, has a soft spot in his heart for him\'92 /													to hold dear		< ilu-mik-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				ilumike-	ilumike-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
ilumilek	bk/vbksr	pregnant woman or sea mammal															pregnant woman or sea mammal		< ilumik-lek				ilumilek	ilumilek	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
ilumsuggangite-	bk/vce[f3bns-	helpless (feel ~)		ilumsuggangituq \'91he was very concerned\'92; ilumsuggangunanga tengegkayugmi igleghtunga ifkaannayukanginkut \'91feeling helpless I traveled on the plane thinking that we might crash\'92	defeated (feel ~)												to feel helpless; to feel defeated		< ilu-?-ghhaq-(ng)ite-		A&W 28		ilumsuggangite-	ilumsuggangite-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1084 \u1089 \u1091 \u1093 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ilungighteqe-	bk/3b5ns2s-	anxious (be ~)		ilungightequq \'91he is worried\'92 / ilungightequtkaa \'91he is worried over it\'92	worried (be ~)												to be anxious; to be worried		< ilu-?-				ilungighteqe-	ilungighteqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ilungiitaq	bk/37nf2	snack															to snack		< ilu-ngiitaq				ilungitaq	ilungxtaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ilungiitigh-	bk/37nb4-	snack		ilungiitightuq \'91he is snacking\'92 /													to snack		< ilungiitaq-ligh-				ilungitigh-	ilungxtigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ilungite-	bk/3bns-	indecisive (be ~)			unreliable (be ~)	lack mental strength or willpower											to be indecisive; to be unreliable; to lack mental strength or willpower		< ilu-(ng)ite-				ilungite-	ilungite-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ilupeghaq	bk/gs4f2	liner for clothes		Iigganka 
\f2\i ilupeghalget
\f0\i0  maqapigtut. \'91My 
\f2\i lined
\f0\i0  gloves are very warm.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 58)													liner for clothes		PE ilup03(a3) (under PE ilu); < ilu-?-				ilupeghaq	ilupeghaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ilutmiighte-	bk/nv75ns-	go inward			inward (go ~)	river (go into the ~)											to go inward; go into the river		< ilu-tmiighte-				ilutmighte-	ilutmxghte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1090 \u1084 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ilutu-	bk/ne-	courageous (be ~)															to be courageous		< ilu-tu-				ilutu-	ilutu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1090 \u1091 -\
ilutughsagh-	bk/ne5cz4-	support		ilutughsaghaa \'91he encouraged her\'92 /	encourage	reassure											to encourage; to reassure; to support		 < ilutughte-yagh-				ilutughsagh-	ilutughsagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
ilutughte-	bk/ne5ns-	feel encouraged or reassured		ilutughtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ilutughtaa \'91he feels encouraged\'92 /	encouraged (feel ~)	reassured (feel ~)											to feel encouraged or reassured		 < ilu-?-				ilutughte-	ilutughte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iluuq	bk02			
\f2\i Iluuq
\f0\i0 , suyukaghnga! \'85 
\f2\i iluuq
\f0\i0 , nayaka tugunaghan estamaneng atghaghutelek. \'91
\f2\i Buddy
\f0\i0 , pull me out! \'85 
\f2\i buddy
\f0\i0 , I\'92ll give you my sister who has four cheek tatoos.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. 7-8); 
\f2\i this is the vocative of
\f0\i0  ilughaq (q.v.)													cousin (vocative); buddy (vocative)						iluq	ilxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1179 \
ima	bvf	bad (too ~!)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  ima aanuq \'91too bad, he went out\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 iimna	too bad!	oh no!								no (oh ~!)			too bad!; oh no!		PE imma				ima	ima	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \
imaangigh-	bv63b4-	sob uncontrolably		qiyaaghwalghii imaangighnaayukan mangighhnaqutkesaaghaat \'91they were trying to make her stop crying before she starting sobbing uncontrolably\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mangigh-									check, but looks okay; explained as; qiyaaghwapagllak, which VK translates as here				to sob uncontrolably		PE man0!- and ma&0-		A&W 28		imangigh-	imxngigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u257 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
imaghlliigh-	bvf5k74-	travel in rough waters		imaghlliightuq \'91he traveled in rough waters\'92; angyat imaghlliighngaaghmeng iwernga kaatut \'91even though the boat traveled in rough seas it arrived\'92; meq imaghlliighnapigtuq \'91the ocean is too rough for traveling\'92									good				to travel in rough waters				A&W 28		imaghlligh-	imaghllxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
imaghlluk	bvf5k]/r	gale			waves in ocean												gale; waves in ocean		< imaq-lluk		CK Rub 164 CK		imaghlluk	imaghlluk	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
imaghniin	bvf4y7y	waterproof gutskin parka used at sea		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 imaghniitet,
\f2\i  for one gutskin parka													
\f0\i0 waterproof gutskin parka used at sea		+ PY ima3niin \'91waterproof gutskin parka used with kayak\'92 (cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik ima3niin); < imaq-?-(u)n-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 imaghnin	imaghnxn	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1085 \
imaghqe-	bvf52s-	drench		imaghquq \'91it got drenched\'92; imaghqaa \'91he drenched it\'92 /													to drench		< imaq-ghqe\super 3\nosupersub -				imaghqe-	imaghqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
imaghtaq	bvf5nf2	\'93shorthorn\'94 sculpin		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined	
\f0\i0 sculpin, \'93shorthorn\'94												\'93shorthorn\'94 sculpin		< imaq-?-		SLI Cur. Man. 53; VK glosses this as \'93large sculpin caught in winter\'94		imaghtaq	imaghtaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
imaghyak	bvf4mzr	abcess			boil (on skin)												abcess; boil		PE imarya! (under PE ima(3)); < imaq-?		CK Rub 163		imaghyak	imaghyak	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
imalek	bvfksr	filled thing			pregnant woman												filled thing; pregnant woman		< imaq-lek				imalek	imalek	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
imallu	bvfk]/	not as planned		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 not as planned		< ima=llu		VK		imallu	imallu	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
imamta	bvfvnf	even though I told him/her \'85		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Kii-i aghnaq pineghllugllapiwaa. 
\f2\i Imamta
\f0\i0  ineghtaqsiikun! \'91Boy, that woman is sure disobedient. 
\f2\i And here I did
\f0\i0  warn her!\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 134)													even though I told him/her \'85		< ima=mta				imamta	imamta	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \
imamtawha	bvfvnf[1f	time after time		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 time after time		< imamta=wha		VK		imamtawha	imamtawha	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1265 \u1072 \
imanaq	bvfyf2	mollusk			clam												mollusk; clam		PE iman03 and imana3  (under PE ima(3)); < imaq-?-				imanaq	imanaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
imange-	bvf3s-	leak water in		imanguq \'91it leaked water in\'92, \'91it got pus\'92, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91she got pregnant\'92 /	acquire contents or pus	pregnant (become ~)											to leak water in; to acquire contents or pus; to become pregnant		PE iman0!- (under PE ima(3)); < imaq-nge-				imange-	imange-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 -\
imangesleq	bvf3sck]s2	pool of sea water on surface of ice field or shore		
\f2\i may become covered with a layer of ice and snow concealing the hazzard; see item 19 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	puddle of sea water on surface of ice field or shore												sea water pool or puddle on surface of ice field or shore		< imaq-?				imangesleq	imangesleq	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
imaq	bvf2	open sea		imaa \'91its contents\'92; imami \'91in the ocean\'92; angyat qavaghtaamaat imami \'91the boat (with crew) spent the night out in the ocean\'92; 
\f2\i Imaq
\f0\i0  unegna yakughnaqayugllak. \'91
\f2\i The
\f0\i0  
\f2\i ocean
\f0\i0  out there can be very dangerous.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 63); Kililqa 
\f2\i imangumayalghii
\f0\i0 , aghalighluku piniightaa. \'91My cutting started getting 
\f2\i pus
\f0\i0 , but it is okay now after putting medicine on it.\'92 (SLR JR. DICT. 63)	contents	pus								ocean			open sea; ocean; contents; pus		PE ima(3)				imaq	imaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \
imaqe-	bvf2s-	full of something		meghmeng imaquq \'91it is full of water\'92													to be full of something		< imaqe-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				imaqe-	imaqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
imaqlightaghaq	bvf2k]b5nf4f2	raincoat made from long strips of walrus or bearded seal dried intestines		
\f2\i Chukotka (R); usually made with embroidery													
\f0\i0 raincoat made from long strips of walrus or bearded seal dried intestines 		< imaq-?		CK Rub 163		imaqlightaghaq	imaqlightaghaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
Imaqliq*	Bvf2k]b2	Big Diomede Island		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices;
\f0\i0  Imaqlighmii \'91person from Big Diomede\'92	Diomede (Big ~ Island)												Big Diomede Island		< imaq-qliq				Imaqliq*	Imaqliq*	\uc0\u1048 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
imaqun	bvf2ey	too bad!		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 too bad!		< ima=qun				imaqun	imaqun	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
imatae	bvfnfs	open water (surrounded by sea ice) near land		
\f2\i used in dual, 
\f0\i0 imatek, 
\f2\i for one such area; 
\f0\i0 imategnun anighughluta taglaghtukut \'91we made it to the open water and came home\'92; imasipanghitaa ugavantaghaam \'91the northwest wind didn\'92t move the ice enough to make open water\'92									check, but looks okay; explained as: meghek qutem tunganganilnguuk, which VK translates as above				open water (surrounded by sea ice) near land				A&W 28		imatae	imatae	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \
imatuq	bvfne2	I don't think so		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 I don't think so		< ima=tuq				imatuq	imatuq	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \
imeg-	bvsu-	roll up		imegtuq \'91it rolled itself up\'92 (e.g. a paper that was rolled up and had been unrolled and held flat and then rolled up again); iimgaa \'91he rolled it up\'92 / iimgiiq \'91he rolled up something\'92; iimgumaaq \'91it is rolled up\'92; iimgaq \'91roll of something\'92; iimgutaa \'91he rolled something up in it, rolled up something for her\'92; iimgutaghqaq \'91wrapping material\'92; iimgutfikuq \'91he wrapped something around himself\'92; iimgutfikaa \'91he wrapped something around it\'92	coil up	fold up								run in a group
\f2\i  (slang)			
\f0\i0 to roll up; to coil up; to fold up; 
\f2\i (slang) 
\f0\i0 to run in a group		PE im0!-				imeg-	imeg-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1099 \u1075 -\
Imegyaalek	Bvsumzksr	Emekyalok Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i questioned; see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Emekyalok Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		< imeg-?-lek				Imegyalek	Imegyxlek	\uc0\u1048 \u1084 \u1099 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
imerutaaghute-	bvshen64ens-	coil (it) around something		qiipaq imerutaaghutigu qiipalghutakun \'91wind the thread around the spool\'92	wind (it) around something												to coil or wind (it) around something		< imerutaaq-(u)te-				imerutaghute-	imerutxghute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
imerutaaq	bvshen62	coil of rope, or the like															coil of rope, or the like		< imeg-?-				imerutaq	imerutxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
imeseghetaq	bvscs4snf2	scraper as for dishes															scraper as for dishes						imeseghetaq	imeseghetaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
imgagh-	bvuf4-	implants itself (of a spirit		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to implant itself (of a spirit)				CK Rub 164		imgagh-	imgagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
imigh-	bvb4-	put contents in		imighaa \'91he put something in it\'92 / imiimaaq \'91it has had something put in it\'92; Aghnaq 
\f2\i imiitiiq
\f0\i0  nunivagmeng akmagutagnun. \'91The woman 
\f2\i put
\f0\i0  some greens in the keg.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 63)	fill (partially or totally)												to put contents in; to fill (partially or totally)		< imaq-ligh-; PE immi3- (under PE ima(3))				imigh-	imigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 -\
Imighi	Bvb4b	Emeghee Pt. on St. Lawrence Is. (site north along coast from ~)		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site north along coast from Emeghee Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Imighi	Imighi	\uc0\u1048 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \
imiisaq	bv7cz2	gift given in gratitude to someone who has brought food to a feast															gift given in gratitude to someone who has brought food to a feast		< imiite-(u)saq (?)		A&W 28		imisaq	imxsaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1251 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
imiitaa-	bv7n6-	feel insecure when alone because of helplessness		umegneghmi imiitaamalghii iflangwaaghaluni \'91he felt insecure when he was lost in the snow storm\'92													to feel insecure when alone because of helplessness				CK A & W 29		imita-	imxtx-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u257 -\

\f1\b imiite-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub bv7ns-\'a1	empty (be ~)		imiituq \'91it is empty\'92 / salngagek imiituk \'91the box is empty\'92													to be empty		< imaq-(ng)ite-				imite-1	imxte-1	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\
\nosupersub imiite-2	bv7ns-\'99	give something to one who has brought food over		Aghnaghaghhaq aghnam 
\f2\i imiitaa
\f0\i0  sunganeng awalighiyan neghsameng.\'92  \'91The woman 
\f2\i give
\f0\i0  the little girl a beaded necklace when she brought over some seal meat.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 63)													to give something to one who has brought food over		< imigh-(u)te-				imite-2	imxte-2	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub imlaa	bvk9	unborn seal pup		imlaalek \'91pregnant seal\'92	pup (unborn seal ~)	seal (unborn ~ pup)											unborn seal pup		PE imla(C)u(!) or imla(C)u3				imla	imlx	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \
Impagaq	Bvgfuf2	site at VABM \'93Grace\'94 on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site at VABM \'93Grace\'94 on St. Lawrence Is.						Impagaq	Impagaq	\uc0\u1048 \u1084 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
impite-	bvgbns-	distribute piece(s) of a catch during butchering		impituq \'91he received a piece\'92; impitaa \'91he gave him a pieces\'92 /= inpite-	piece(s) (distribute ~ of a catch during butchering)	receive piece(s) of a catch during butchering											to distribute or receive a piece or pieces of a catch during butchering						impite-	impite-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
imtiwala	bvnb1fkz	knife (big heavy ~ carried on back by herders for self-defense)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 big heavy knife carried on back by herders for self-defense		from Chukchi imtik \'91carry on back\'92, and wal0 \'91knife\'92		CK Rub 166		imtiwala	imtiwala	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1090 \u1080 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
Imtugmii(t)	Bvneuvb\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< Imtuk\super 1\nosupersub -mii		CK V & E 76	xxxt	Imtugmi(t)	Imtugmx(t)	\uc0\u1048 \u1084 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 (\u1090 )\

\f1\b Imtuk\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Bvner\super \'a1	\nosupersub village site in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village in Chukotka						Imtuk1	Imtuk1	\uc0\u1048 \u1084 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 1\

\f1\b Imtuk\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Bvner\super \'99	\nosupersub Gambell (pond in central area of present-day ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 pond in central area of present-day Gambell						Imtuk2	Imtuk2	\uc0\u1048 \u1084 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 2\
imtuqaq	bvne2f2	stutter		aghnaghaq imtuqalguuq \'91the girl has a stutter\'92; imtuqalighluni akuziiq \'91he is speaking with a stutter\'92	stuttering condition												stutter; stuttering condition		PE imtuqa3- and imtuq(q)i3-				imtuqaq	imtuqaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
imtuqiqe-	bvne2b2s-	stutter		imtuqiquq \'91he stuttered\'92 / imtuqiqumaghmi akuziiq \'91he spokewith a stutter\'92													to stutter		< imtuqaq-liqe-				imtuqiqe-	imtuqiqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
imugh-	bve4-	cry (on the verge of ~ing)		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  imughyugtuq he is tearful, on the verge of crying; imuqaa \'91he is on the verge of crying over it over it\'92; imughnaghtuq \'91it makes one feel like crying\'92	tearful												on the verge of crying; tearful						imugh-	imugh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1271 -\
imughaghtagh-	bve4f5nf4-	difficulty in breathing (have watery eyes and ~ due to wind) 		anuqem taghnughhaghhaq imughaghtaghqaa \'91the wind made the little child have watery eyes and difficulty in breathing\'92	watery eyes (have ~ and difficulty in breathing due to wind)												to have watery eyes and difficulty in breathing due to wind		< imugh-?-				imughaghtagh-	imughaghtagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
imughteqe-	bve5ns2s-	tearful due to strong emotions (be ~)															to be tearful due to strong emotions		< imugh-?-				imughteqe-	imughteqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
imukun	bverey	it's about time!		
\f2\i particle; cf.
\f0\i0  iimna													it's about time!	rfr ybrjulf ght;lt\\ dgthdst\\ bjkmrj ctqxfc			CK V & E 125 (Russ vocab)		imukun	imukun	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
imutagh-	bvenf4-	coil the rope of (it)		angalqatani imutaghaqeftii unangkani tuguluku \'91he was coiling the rope of his seal hook after taking his seal\'92													to coil the rope of (it)				CK A & W 29		imutagh-	imutagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
inagmig-	byfuvbu-	hold in lap															to hold in lap		< inak-mig-				inagmig-	inagmig-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
inak	byfr	lap (of body)		
\f2\i used in the dual for one lap: 
\f0\i0 inagegka \'91my lap\'92													lap (of body)						inak	inak	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
ineg-	bysu-	pain (have ~ in inguinal glands)		iin\'92gaqaa \'91he has pain in his inguinal glands\'92; 
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  inek	inguinal glands (have pain in ~)								looks good				to have pain in inguinal glands	,jktnm -j gf[jds[ ;tktpf[			Rub. 166		ineg-	ineg-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1075 -\
ineghla	bys4kz	friend			favorite companion												friend; favorite companion		from Chukchi 0ninel\'920n, 0neel\'920n \'91older brother\'92	14			ineghla	ineghla	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1103 \
ineghneghlliqe-	bys4ys5k]b2s-	disobedient (be ~)			play around								we have this as an example under ineghte-, but it probably should be an independent entry as here				to be disobedient; to play about	yt ckeifnmcz. ,fkjdfnmcz	< ineghte-neghlluk-iqe-		Rub. 169		ineghneghlliqe-	ineghneghlliqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ineghte-	bys5ns-	admonish		ineghtaa \'91he forbade her\'92 / iinghutaa \'91he warned about it\'92; ineghneghlluk \'91one who is hard to discipline\'92	warn	tell not to do something								forbid			to admonish; to warn; to alert; to forbid; to tell not to do something		PE in03-				ineghte-	ineghte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
inegmig-	bysuvbu-	put under one's arm or between one's leg			put in pocket	arm (put under one\'92s ~)								pocket (put in ~)			to put under one's arm or between one's leg; to put in pocket		< inek-mig-				inegmig-	inegmig-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
inegniigh-	bysuy74-	put hand into pocket		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 looks plausible though inek is armpit or groin, but check				to put hand into pocket	ceyenm here d rfhvfy	< inek-niigh-		Rub. 168		inegnigh-	inegnxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
inegrewaaq	bysuhs162	armpit (middle of ~)			groin (middle of ~)												middle of armpit or groin		< inek-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				inegrewaq	inegrewxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1099 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
inek	bysr	groin		iin\'92ga \'91his groin\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91its (the montain\'92s) base area\'92	armpit or groin-like bend in body or land												groin; armpit; bend in body or land similar to armpit or groin		PY-S in0k				inek	inek	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \
inekiitek	bysr7nsr	if perchance		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 = enekiitek	well maybe, as a matter of fact	if I do something											well maybe, as a matter of fact; if I do something; if perchance		from Chukchi 0n0kit \'91if\'92				inekitek	inekxtek	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
ineligh-	byskb4fr6	sew on a pocket		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 pocket (sew on a ~)								cf. inegniigh- which Rub. glosses as \'91to put hand in pocket\'92; suggests that \'91pocket\'92 is a newer meaning for inek \'91groin\'92 -- check				to sew on a pocket	ghbibdfnm rfhvfy			Rub. 169		ineligh-	ineligh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1082 \u257 \
ineqe-	bys2s-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > ineqsuke-, ineqsunagh-, iinqe-																			ineqe-	ineqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ineqerewaaq	bys2shs162	armpit (specifically)															armpit (specifically)		< inek-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				ineqerewaq	ineqerewxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
ineqsuke-	bys2c/rs-	find attractive or cute		ineqsukaa \'91he finds him cute, attractive\'92 /	attractive (find ~)	cute (find ~)											to find attractive or cute (especially a baby)		PE in0q0-; < ineqe-yu-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				ineqsuke-	ineqsuke-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -\
ineqsunagh-	bys2c/yf4-	attractive ( ~ (especially of a female))		ineqsunaghtuq \'91she is attractive, pretty\'92 /	pretty (be ~)												to be attractive (especially of a female); to be pretty		PE in0qyuna3- (under PE in0q0-); < ineqe-yu-nagh-				ineqsunagh-	ineqsunagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1089 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ineqsunaghhalek	bys2c/yf5fksr	attractive (how ~!)		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 pretty (how ~!)	cute (how ~!)								beautiful (how ~!)			how cute!; how pretty!; how attractive!\'92; how beautiful!		< ineqsunagh-ghhalek				ineqsunaghhalek	ineqsunaghhalek	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1089 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
ingagh-	b3f4-	lying down		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  ingaghtuq \'91he lay down\'92; ingaghtaa \'91he lay it down\'92; ingaghngaaq \'91he is lying down\'92; ingaghmi \'91lieing down\'92													lying down		PE i&&a3-				ingagh-	ingagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Ingaghpak	B3f5gfr	Chechekuyem Strait in Chukotka (site on the mainland side of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on the mainland side of Chechekuyem Strait in Chukotka				CK		Ingaghpak	Ingaghpak	\uc0\u1048 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \

\f1\b Ingaliq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub B3fkb2\super \'a1	\nosupersub Little Diomede Island		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices;
\f0\i0  Ingalighmii \'91person from Little Diomede\'92	Diomede (Little ~ Island)												Little Diomede Island						Ingaliq1	Ingaliq1	\uc0\u1048 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 1\

\f1\b Ingaliq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub B3fkb2\super \'99	\nosupersub Punuk Islands off the east coast of St. Lawrence Is. (southwesternmost of the ~)		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 southwesternmost of the Punuk Islands off the east coast of St. Lawrence Is.						Ingaliq2	Ingaliq2	\uc0\u1048 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 2\
ingan, ingata	b3fy. b3fnf	side area of the traditional dome-shaped house															side area of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< iga(ni)-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -			ingatngiiritaq	ingan, ingata	ingan, ingata	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 , \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \
ingani	b3fyb	there (over ~)		
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  iigna	over there												over there						ingani	ingani	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
ingapighqaagh-	b3fgb5264-	move over a little		ingapighqaaghtuq \'91he moved over\'92; ingapighqaaghaa \'91he moved it, postponed it\'92 /
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ingani	postpone												to move over a little; to postpone						ingapighqagh-	ingapighqxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u257 \u1271 -\
ingatngiiritaq	b3fn37hbnf2	wall plank of or support for side area of traditional dwelling															wall plank of or support for side area of traditional dwelling		< ingan-?				ingatngiritaq	ingatngxritaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1090 \u1187 \u1251 \u1088 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ingek	b3sr	ink		iingka \'91my ink\'92													ink		from English \'91ink\'92	SLI			ingek	ingek	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1099 \u1082 \
inghu-	by4e-	pick berries		inghuuq \'91he picked berries\'92; inghwii \'91he picked them\'92 / inghutaa \'91he picked berries for her\'92; inghuvik \'91berry-picking spot on the tundra\'92	berries (pick ~)	pick up small berry-like items (beads, marbles, etc.)											to pick berries; to pick up small berry-like items (beads, marbles, etc.)		PE a!an3u(Ca3)				inghu-	inghu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 -\
inglaghet	b3kz4sn	ceremonial competion		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); two groups face each other, one on the north side and the other on the south side of the dwelling; the competition begins with singing and dancing; the winning team recieves an award	
\f0\i0 competition, ceremonial												a certain ceremonial competion				CK Rub 172		inglaghet	inglaghet	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \
ingleghan	b3ks4fy	breeding ground on ice for sea mammals		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 breeding ground on ice for sea mammals		< ingleq-?		CK Rub 171		ingleghan	ingleghan	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \
ingleghaq	b3ks4f2	sled bed slat			slat of sled bed												sled bed slat		< ingleq-ghaq				ingleghaq	ingleghaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ingleghem imaa	b3ks4sv bv6	family		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); literally
\f0\i0  \'91the contents of the living/sleeping area\'92									check this nice idiom				family 	ctvmz. ctvtqcndj	< ingleq-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + imaq-
\f2\i possessed		
\f0\i0 Rub. 171		ingleghem ima	ingleghem imx	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1084  \u1080 \u1084 \u257 \
Ingleghnaghmii(t) 	B3ks4yf4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< Ingleghnaq-mii			xxxt	Ingleghnaghmi(t) 	Ingleghnaghmx(t) 	\u1048 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Ingleghnaq	B3ks4yf2	Sivokut (former village east of Cape ~ in Chukotka)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village east of Cape Sivolkut in Chukotka 		< ingleq-naq				Ingleghnaq	Ingleghnaq	\uc0\u1048 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
Ingleghrengestat	&3ks4hs3scnfn	Powooliak (site near ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Applendices													
\f0\i0 site near Powooliak						Ingleghrengestat	Ingleghrengestat	\uc0\u1250 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \
ingleghtaq	b3ks5nf2	crosspiece in roof of the traditional dome-shaped house											
\f2\i see Parts of Traditional House in Appendix				
\f0\i0 crosspiece fastening together foundation poles (
\f2\i emgaari
\f0\i0 ) around the periphery of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< ingleq-taq\super 1				\nosupersub ingleghtaq	ingleghtaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
inglek	b3ksr	anchor for a snare		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 anchor for a snare				CK Rub 171		inglek	inglek	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
ingleq	b3ks2	living/sleeping area in the traditional dome-shaped house, or in a tent or shack		
\f2\i also used in the plural,
\f0\i0  ingleghet
\f2\i , for one such area	
\f0\i0 sleeping area in the traditional dome-shaped house, or in a tent or shack								
\f2\i ; see Parts of Traditional House in Appendix				
\f0\i0 living/sleeping area in the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.), or in a tent or shack		PE i&l03				ingleq	ingleq	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
ingliigh-	b3k74-	lay out bedding		yugem sleeping bag-ni tuguluku ingliighluni ingaghlluni qavaamalghii \'91the man took his sleeping bag, laid (it) out for bedding, went to bed and slept\'92													to lay out bedding		< ingleq-liigh-				ingligh-	inglxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
ingllegun	b3k]suey	household member		ingllegutkullghiini qerngaghmetukut \'91we are together with our household members\'92; ingllegutanga igaghyaghaquq \'91her roommate goes to school\'92	roommate												household member; roommae				CK A & W 29 		ingllegun	ingllegun	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
ingllevagh-	b3k]sdf4-	move sideways		siqinghem piitellgha ingllevaghtuq \'91where the sun rises moved further to the side\'92	sideways (move ~)												to move sideways				CK A & W 30		ingllevagh-	ingllevagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ingllevaq	b3k]sdf2	area farther to the side		ingllevaq aagna aqavzigtuuq \'91the area farther to that side has lots of salmonberries\'92													area farther to the side				VK		ingllevaq	ingllevaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
inglu	b3k/	partner		iiyma inglunga \'91my other eye\'92; inglungituq \'91he doesn't have a partner\'92; inglukaa \'91he is her partner\'92	spouse	one of pair								complementary side			partner; one of pair; spouse; complementary side; half		PE i&lu				inglu	inglu	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \
inglugtun	b3k/[ney	with both arms or sides		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 both (with ~ arms or sides)												with both sides; with both arms		< inglu-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 inglugtun	inglugtun	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
inglukutaq	b3k/renf2	wooden hook used to retrieve a fishing line from the water in order to clean off the ice from it															wooden hook used to retrieve a fishing line from the water in order to clean off the ice from it		< inglu-qutaq		CK Rub 171		inglukutaq	inglukutaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
inglupigaq	b3k/gbuf2	one side only															one side only		< inglu-pik				inglupigaq	inglupigaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
ingluziq	b3k/pb2	exchange wife		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 wife (exchange ~)												exchange wife		< inglu-?-				ingluziq	ingluziq	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1079 \u1080 \u1179 \
ingtaghan	b3nf4fy	brace or spreader used between keel and gunwale in building skin boat frame															brace or spreader used between keel and gunwale in building skin boat frame						ingtaghan	ingtaghan	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \
ingum	b3ev	over there (of the one ~)		
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 iigna	that over there 
\f2\i (relative case)												
\f0\i0 of the one over there; that over there 
\f2\i (relative case)						
\f0\i0 ingum	ingum	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \
ingun, inguta	b3ey. b3enf	boat seat			seat in boat	thwart											boat seat; thwart		PE i&un (under PE i&0t-)				ingun, inguta	ingun, inguta	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 , \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
inguqaq	b3e2f2	captain's seat		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ingun	seat, captain\'92s												captain's seat						inguqaq	inguqaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
ingutuq	b3ene2	bowhead whale yearling			whale, bowhead yearling	yearling bowhead whale								
\f2\i Balaena mysticetus			
\f0\i0 yearling bowhead whale (Balaena mysticetus)		PE i&uta3				ingutuq	ingutuq	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \
ingyagh-, ingyaghaghte-	b3mz4-. b3mz4f5ns-	do something ahead of another		inghyaghaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ingyaghaghtaa \'91he got ahead of him\'92 / kilgaaqulghiini mekelghiighem sivulini ingyaghaa \'91in the foot-race the boy gained and and passed the one who was in front of him\'92; uyughaan anengani ingyaghaa \'91the younger brother caught up with and surpassed his older brother in height\'92; aghnam angyameng kakillghiini ilani ingyaghaghtii \'91the woman finished sewing her part before the others when they sewed the skin-boat covering\'92	pass	go ahead of								surpass			to do something ahead of another; to pass; to go ahead of; to surpass	jgtht;fnm	PE i&ya3-		CK V & E 137 (Russ Voc)		ingyagh-	ingyagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -, \u1080 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ini-	byb-	hang to dry		inii \'91he hung it or them up\'92 / iniiguq \'91he hung something\'92; iniighet \'91clothes that have been hung to dry\'92													to hang to dry		PE ini-				ini-	ini-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1080 -\
iniiragh-	by7hf4-	dry meat in strips to dry inside the house		iniiraghtuq \'91he hung strips of meat to dry\'92; iniiraghaa \'91he hung it up to dry\'92 /													to dry meat in strips to dry inside the house		< ini-?-				iniragh-	inxragh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1251 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iniiraq	by7hf2	meat (small strip of dried ~)															small strip of dried meat		< ini-?-				iniraq	inxraq	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1251 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
inilleq	bybk]s2	frame for drying skins		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 frame for drying skins	hfvf lkz  ceirb ireh			CK V & E 92		inilleq	inilleq	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
inillghaataq	bybk]56nf2	clothesline															clothesline		< ini-?-(u)taq				inillghataq	inillghxtaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
inpite-	bygbns-	distribute piece(s) of a catch during butchering		inpituq \'91he received a piece\'92; inpitaa \'91he gave him a piece\'92 / = impite-	piece(s) (distribute or receive ~ of a catch during butchering)	receive piece(s) of a catch during butchering											to distribute or receive a piece or pieces of a catch during butchering						inpite-	inpite-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
inqun	by2ey	just because		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 in order to	of course											just because; in order to; of course		from Chukchi i&qun \'91in order to\'92				inqun	inqun	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \

\f1\b insena\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub bycsyf\super s	\nosupersub engine 		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka; used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 insenek, 
\f2\i for one engine or motor	
\f0\i0 motor												engine; motor	vjnjh	from English \'91engine\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (V&E85, R168)		
\f0\i0 insenae	insenae	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1089 \u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \u1099 \
inseniya	bycsybz	engineer		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 engineer		from English \'91engineer\'92	SLI Chuk.	Rub. 168; SLI Cur. Res. Man. 159		inseniya	inseniya	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1089 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1103 \
inukagh-	byerf4-	suddenly change one\'92s mind and withdraw from an activity or not repeat an action		inukaghluni allallu piyaghqaagpenani pikaaguq \'91he suddenly changed his mind and will never to do it again\'92; ilakutekestaghngaaghmek inukaasimaak \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  were  friends, but suddenly they changed their minds (about each other)\'92 													to suddenly change one\'92s mind and withdraw from an activity or not repeat an action				CK A & W 30		inukagh-	inukagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Invet	Bydsn	Invut Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Invut Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.						Invet	Invet	\uc0\u1048 \u1085 \u1074 \u1099 \u1090 \
inwa, inwallu	by1f. by1fk]/	not even		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Whangkuta katam quyngilegni, iwerngaqun nasiqutestaqiinkut piyukellemtestun 
\f2\i inwa
\f0\i0  tukfighluku. \'91Those of us who owned reindeer could get as much as we wanted 
\f2\i not even 
\f0\i0 having to pay for of it.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:84)	without even												not even; without even		from Chukchi ?	x			inwa, inwallu	inwa, inwallu	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1265 \u1072 , \u1080 \u1085 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
inwaamllu	by16vk]/	not even			without even												not even; without even		< inwa=?=llu	x			inwamllu	inwxmllu	\uc0\u1080 \u1085 \u1265 \u257 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
ipa	bgf	truth		ipanguuq \'91it is true\'92; 
\f2\i also a particle: 
\f0\i0 Pilugugluni aatkallegaghhani taakut aghyughllakat iqisaqminiki pinilghiimeng aalluni, nuyani pinighsaghwaaghyaqminigu, aghnaaftughnguq 
\f2\i ipa
\f0\i0 . 'After he got dressed, when he took off his old worn out clothes and put on good clothing, when he fixed his hair, well, "he" evidentally was a female 
\f2\i in fact!
\f0\i0 ' (AYUM. UNGIP. II:7)	in truth, in fact												the truth; in truth; in fact		from Chukchi ipe \'91actually\'92				ipa	ipa	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \
ipallu	bgfk]/	unexpectedly		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 ipallu qaspighqelluku taghnughhani aqlaghangilngughmi aanutaa \'91she dressed her baby more than would be expected on the warm day and took her outside\'92	ordinary (out of the ~)												unexpectedly; out of the ordinary		< ipa=llu		VK (example)		ipallu	ipallu	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
ipapestaaq	bgfgscn62	of course		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 certainly	truthfully											of course; certainly; truthfully		< ipa-?-				ipapestaq	ipapestxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
ipapiighqe-	bgfg752s-	come to pass		Entaqun ataasiighneghunaqeghllaget 
\f2\i ipapiighqengnganaqeghllaget
\f0\i0  samun tamaghhaanun. \'91Probably they endeavored to be direct and 
\f2\i forthright
\f0\i0  in regard to everything.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:86)	become reality												to come to pass; to become reality		< ipapik-ughqe-				ipapighqe-; ipapighqe-	ipapxghqe-; ipapighqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ipapik	bgfgbr	correctness		ipapigestun \'91like reality\'92; ipapiglluggaghestun \'91as if it were real\'92; 
\f2\i also functions as aparticle:
\f0\i0  "Ukamangaatnguzin?" "
\f2\i Ipapik
\f0\i0 ."  \'91\'93Are you Ukamangaan?\'94 \'93
\f2\i Indeed (I am)
\f0\i0 .\'94 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 5); Angyalegtam aapsimakanga, "
\f2\i Ipapiik
\f0\i0 ?" Kaanghum pimakanga, "
\f2\i Ipapik
\f0\i0 ." \'91The captain asked him, \'93
\f2\i Really
\f0\i0 ?\'94 Kaanghu answered, \'93
\f2\i Really
\f0\i0 .\'94 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 42); Iwernga elpek alingumangilnguten, 
\f2\i ipapik
\f0\i0   iknaquten. \'93However you weren\'92t scared, for 
\f2\i indeed
\f0\i0  you are strong.\'94 (AANGHHAQ 38)	truth or truthfully	reality or really								indeed			correctness; truth; reality; indeed; really; truthfully		< ipa-pik				ipapik	ipapik	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
ipeg-	bgsu-	sharp (be ~)		ipegtuq \'91it is sharp\'92 / ipegrakegtaq \'91a very sharp or very pointed thing\'92													to be sharp		PE ip0!-				ipeg-	ipeg-	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 -\
ipegriqe-	bgsuhb2s-	persistent (be ~)		ipegriquq \'91he is being persistent\'92 /													to be persistent		< ipeg-?-				ipegriqe-	ipegriqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ipegsaan	bgs[c9y	whetstone			sharpening stone												whetstone; sharpening stone		< ipegsagh-(u)n				ipegsan	ipegsxn	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \
ipegsagh-	bgs[cz4-	sharpen			whet												to sharpen; whet		< ipeg-sagh-				ipegsagh-	ipegsagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
ipig-	bgbu-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > ipigkestaaghhaq, ipigkingwaaq, ipigra-, ipigtu-															PE ipi(!)				ipig-	ipig-	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 -\
ipigkestaaghhaq	bgb[rscn65f2	low boot			boot, low												one that does not come far up the leg; low boot		< igig-kestaaghhaq				ipigkestaghhaq	ipigkestxghhaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1080 \u1093 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
ipigkingwaaq	bgburb3162	boot, short, of shaved sealskin															short boot of shaved sealskin		< ipig-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				ipigkingwaq	ipigkingwxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
ipigra-	bgbuhf-	kicking about (be ~)		ipigramaluku meghmi kaalluku tugwaat \'91he was thrashing around in the water when they rescued him\'92;  taghnughhaq ipigrangakun uyamigluku aanutaa \'91he took the child out on his shoulders when he was thrashing and kicking around\'92	thrashing around with the feet (be ~)												to be kicking about; to be thrashing around with the feet				CK A & W 30 		ipigra-	ipigra-	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 -\
ipigtu-	bgb[ne-	high (come ~ up the leg (of boots, socks, etc.)															to come high up the leg (of boots, socks, etc.)		< ipig-tu-				ipigtu-	ipigtu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 -\
iptag-	bgnfu-	pry		iptagaa \'91he pried it up\'92 / iptagiiq \'91he pried up something\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ipug-	lever (use ~ on)												to pry; to use a lever on						iptag-	iptag-	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 -\
iptagusiq	bgnfuecb2	lever															lever		< iptag-(u)siq				iptagusiq	iptagusiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ipug-	bgeu-	pry		ipugaa \'91he scooped it, pried it up, lifted it up with a fork\'92 / ipugutuq \'91he scooped up some\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 iptag-	scoop	pick up with a fork or other sharp object											to pry; to scoop; to pick up with a fork or other sharp object						ipug-	ipug-	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1091 \u1075 -\
ipugte-	bge[ns-	tilt one's head up		ipugtuq \'91he lifted his head, he perked up\'92 / ipugtestaa \'91he lifted her spirits\'92	perk up												to tilt up one's head; to perk up		< ipug-?-				ipugte-	ipugte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ipugutaq	bgeuenf2	fork (for eating or cooking)		
\f2\i may be used in the plural,
\f0\i0  ipugutat, 
\f2\i for one fork													
\f0\i0 fork (for eating or cooking)		< ipug-(u)taq				ipugutaq	ipugutaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
iqa	b2f	dirt		iqatuqaq \'91dirty thing\'92; iqalguuq \'91it has dirt on it\'92; iqatuuq \'91it is full of, or covered with, dirt\'92													dirt		PE iqa(3)			; > iqaaghqe-, iqangigh-, iqangite-, iqarwa, iqatu-	iqa	iqa	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \
iqaaghqe-	b2652s-	get dirty		iqaaghquq \'91he got dirty\'92; iqaaghqaa \'91he got it dirty\'92 /	dirty (get ~)												to get dirty		< iqa-?-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				iqaghqe-	iqxghqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
iqaaslaak	b26ck]9r	lamprey			
\f2\i Lampetra japonica												
\f0\i0 lamprey (Lampetra japonica)				VK, SLI Cur. Res. Man.		iqaslak	iqxslxk	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \

\f1\b iqa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub b2f\super s	\nosupersub cheek (lower ~)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 iiqmik	corner of mouth)	mouth (corner of ~)											lower cheek; corner of mouth		PE iq0(3)				iqae	iqae	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1099 \
iqaghtaq	b2f5nf2	skin and layer under skin		
\f2\i Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0 qengagka maaqem qenwat asikek iqaghtiighumaak \'91the area under my nose loses its skin from being wiped so often\'92									used also on SLI?				skin and layer under skin		PE iqa3t0 (?)		Akiingqwaghneghet 114		iqaghtaq	iqaghtaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
iqali-	b2fkb-	acquainted (get ~ with a stranger)		anguughem tagtalngani qenwat  iqalimalghii \'91while stormbound he got acquainted with a stranger\'92; iqalituk \'91they got acquainted with each other\'92													to get acquainted with a stranger 				CK A & W 30		iqali-	iqali-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 -\
iqalliniigh-	b2fk]by74-	fish (
\f2\i i.e.,
\f0\i0  endeavor to catch fish)															to fish		< iqalluk-i\super 2\nosupersub -niigh-				iqallinigh-	iqallinxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
iqalliniighvik	b2fk]by74dbr	fishing camp			camp for fishing												fishing camp		< iqalliniigh-vik				iqallinighvik	iqallinxghvik	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
iqallugaq	b2fk]/uf2	tomcod			
\f2\i Microgadus proximus												
\f0\i0 tomcod
\f2\i  (Microgadus proximus)		
\f0\i0 PE iqa@u!a3 (under PE iqa@u!); < iqalluk-ghaq				iqallugaq	iqallugaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
iqalluk	b2fk]/r	fish			salmon												fish; salmon		PE iqa@u!				iqalluk	iqalluk	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
iqallupik	b2fk]/gbr	dolly varden			
\f2\i Microgadus proximus												
\f0\i0 dolly varden (Salvelinus malma)		+ PE iqa@upi! \'91dolly varden\'92 (under PE iqa@u!) (cf. Central up\'92ik  iqa@uxpik, Naukan Yupik iqa@upik \'91dolly varden\'92); < iqalluk-pik				iqallupik	iqallupik	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
Iqalugsik	B2fk/[cbr	Ikalooksik River on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Ikalooksik River on St. Lawrence Is.						Iqalugsik	Iqalugsik	\uc0\u1048 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \
iqanengenaaq	b2fys3sy62	sculpin (arctic staghorn ~)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 iqalluk, iqaniigh-	arctic staghorn sculpin	
\f2\i Gymnocanthus tricuspis											
\f0\i0 arctic staghorn sculpin 
\f2\i (Gymnocanthus tricuspis)						
\f0\i0 iqanengenaq	iqanengenxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
iqangigh-	b2f3b4-	clean (
\f2\i i.e.
\f0\i0 , remove dirt)		iqangightuq \'91he cleaned himself or cleaned something\'92; iqangighaa \'91he cleaned it\'92 /													to clean		PE iqa&i3- (under PE iqa(3)); < iqa-(ng)igh-				iqangigh-	iqangigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
iqangite-	b2f3bns-	clean (be ~)		iqangituq \'91it is clean\'92 / iqangunaan \'91leaving it clean\'92													to be clean		< iqa-(ng)ite-				iqangite-	iqangite-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqangwaaq	b2f3162	slob		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 slovenly person	dirty person											slob; slovenly person; dirty person		< iqa-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK Rub 1540		iqangwaq	iqangwxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
iqaniigh-	b2fy74-	fish for king crab through the ice		iqaniightuq \'91he fished for king crab\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iqalluk, iqanengenaaq; 
\f2\i Iqaniighyaghtunga
\f0\i0  ataka maliglluku, ataasineng neghnaghtunga. \'91I went 
\f2\i crabbing
\f0\i0  with my father and got one crab.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 117)	crab (fish for king ~ through the ice)												to fish for king crab through the ice						iqanigh-	iqanxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
iqarwa	b2fh1f	dirt (much ~)			dirty person (children\'92s term)												much dirt; dirty person (children\'92s term)		< iqa-?-				iqarwa	iqarwa	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1088 \u1265 \u1072 \
iqatu-	b2fne-	dirty (be ~)		iqatuuq \'91it is dirty\'92													to be dirty		< iqa-tu-				iqatu-	iqatu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 -\
iqe-	b2s-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > iqelmun, iqeskestaaq, iqetu-, iqetughte-															PE iq0-				iqe-	iqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
iqeghta	b2s5nf	hard wood (perhaps birch) used for seal hooks			wood (hard ~ (perhaps birch) used for seal hooks)												hard wood (perhaps birch) used for seal hooks		PE iqa3t0				iqeghta	iqeghta	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
iqeghtaq	b2s5nf2	color		iqeghtalguuq \'91it has color\'92; Atkuyaaghma 
\f2\i iqeghtakek
\f0\i0  ghevuk. \'91The 
\f2\i color
\f0\i0  of my shirt is fading away.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 53); Nallavraghyaghqaqenghitiit tawatengwaaq 
\f2\i iqeghtaq
\f0\i0  ayuqsaghngaan. \'91They (the fawns\'92 mothers) could tell them apart even if their 
\f2\i coloration
\f0\i0  was the same.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:58)	coloration												color; coloration		PE iqa3t0				iqeghtaq	iqeghtaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
iqeghte-	b2s5ns-	tether a dead walrus to shore or boat for butchering		iqeghtuq \'91he tethered a dead walrus\'92; iqeghtaa \'91he tethered it\'92 /													to tether a dead walrus to shore or boat for butchering						iqeghte-	iqeghte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqeghtiigh-	b2s5n74-	remove or lose paint		angyam piingha iqeghtiighumaaq \'91the paint on the boat is wearing out\'92; ikuyeni iqeghtiighaa iquluni \'91he scraped his skin when he fell\'92	scrape one\'92s skin accidently												to remove or lose paint; to scrape one\'92s skin accidently		< iqeghtaq-(ng)igh-		VK		iqeghtigh-	iqeghtxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1251 \u1271 -\
iqeghutaq	b2s4enf2	rope used to tether a dead walrus		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rope used to tether a dead walrus		< iqeghte-(u)n		CK Rub 157		iqeghutaq	iqeghutaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
iqekestaaghhaq*	b2srscn65f2	narrow thing		iqekestaaghhaaguq \'91it is narrow\'92													narrow thing		< iqe-(ke)staaghhaq				iqekestaghhaq*	iqekestxghhaq*	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
iqekestaaq	b2srscn62 	narrow thing		iqekestaaghuuq \'91it is narrow\'92													narrow thing		< iqe-(ke)staaq				iqekestaq	iqekestxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
iqelmun	b2skvey	widthwise			across the width												widthwise; across the width		< iqe-?-mun		SLI JR. DICT. 67		iqelmun	iqelmun	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
iqelquq	b2sk]2e2	little finger		iqelqghwa \'91his little finger\'92	finger (little ~)												little finger		PE iq0lqu3				iqelquq	iqelquq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
iqemyaaghagh-	b2svm95f4-	grin broadly		Umiilek aga aanlaataghtuq 
\f2\i iqemyaaghaamaghmi
\f0\i0 . \'91The King went out again 
\f2\i with a big grin on his face
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:232)													to grin broadly		< iqa\super e\nosupersub -?-				iqemyaghagh-	iqemyxghagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iqenge-	b2s3s-	smile		iqenguq \'91he is smiling\'92 / iqengutaa \'91he is smiling at her\'92													to smile		< iqa\super e\nosupersub -nge-				iqenge-	iqenge-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 -\
iqetu-	b2sne-	wide (be ~)		iqetuuq \'91it is wide\'92 / iqetuqaq \'91wide thing\'92													to be wide		< iqa\super e\nosupersub -tu-				iqetu-	iqetu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 -\
iqetughte-	b2sne5ns-	widen		iqetughtuq \'91it became wide\'92; iqetughtaa \'91he widened it\'92 /													to widen		< iqe-tu-ghte-				iqetughte-	iqetughte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b iqetutala\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub b2snenfkf\super s	\nosupersub width		iqetutalnga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  iqetutalanga \'91its width\'92													width		< iqetu-tala				iqetutalae	iqetutalae	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1072 \u1099 \
iqezegaq	b2spsuf2	skin and blubber from corner of whale's mouth			blubber and skin from corner of whale's mouth												skin and blubber from corner of whale's mouth		< iqa\super e\nosupersub -?-				iqezegaq	iqezegaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1079 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
iqezeghaq	b2sps4f2	skin and fat (mangtak) from corner of whale\'92s mouth															skin and fat (mangtak) from corner of whale\'92s mouth		< iqa\super e\nosupersub -?		VK		iqezeghaq	iqezeghaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1079 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
iqiqute-	b2b2ens-	move (it/him) over or away		iqiqutaa \'91he moved over to make room for her\'92; akuzitkegutmineng iqiqutaa \'91since he is a convincing speaker he got him to move away from the situation\'92; Drum-a tamaana 
\f2\i iqiqughtaakaat
\f0\i0  sukalluku, iqitkaqegkangat guunnayukan. \'91They quickly 
\f2\i removed
\f0\i0  all the oil drums before they could explode\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:66)	remove (it/him)								???				to move (it/him) over or away; remove (it/him)		< iqite-		VK		iqiqute-	iqiqute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqite-	b2bns-	move		iqituq \'91he moved\'92; iqitaa \'91he removed it\'92 /	remove												to move; to remove						iqite-	iqite-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqitqute-	b2bn2ens-	move away from a crowd		uglaghyugluni ilamineng waran ellnga iqitqutuq \'91he left because he felt that there were too much of a crowd\'92													to move away from a crowd				CK A & W 30		iqitqute-	iqitqute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqitute-	b2bnens-	room (make ~ for)		iqitutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  separated, made room for eachother\'92; iqitutaa \'91he made room for him\'92	make room for												to make room for		< iqite-(u)te-				iqitute-	iqitute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqlengagh-	b2k]s3f4-	liar (be a ~)		iqlengaghtuq \'91he is a liar\'92; iqlungalghii \'91liar\'92 / Aqlaghaghwuggaaq uksaaqestami 
\f2\i iqlengaawaquq
\f0\i0 . \'91When it begins to feel cold in early fall the cold weather is not here 
\f2\i for real
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 67); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iqlumghu-													to be a liar		+ PY iqlu&a3- \'91be a liar\'92 (under PY-S iqlu) (cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik iq@u&a3- \'91be a liar\'92)				iqlengagh-	iqlengagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iqlengasak	b2k]s3fczr	liar															liar		< iqlengagh-?-sak				iqlengasak	iqlengasak	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
iqlengiqe-	b2k]s3b2s-	lie (prevaricate)		iqlengiquq \'91he lied, he was telling lies\'92 / iqlengiqutaa \'91he lied for her\'92; iqlengiqutkaa \'91he lied about her\'92	tell lie(s)												to lie; to tell lie(s)		< iqlengagh-liqe-				iqlengiqe-	iqlengiqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
iqligh-	b2k]b4-	light a seal-oil lamp		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to light a seal-oil lamp				CK Rub 155		iqligh-	iqligh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
iqlighayiilliqe-	b2k]b4fq7k]b2s-	smile awkwardly from embarrassment		iqlighayiilliquq \'91he smiled in an awkward way\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 iqlighte-													to smile awkwardly from embarrassment		PE iqli3-				iqlighayilliqe-	iqlighayxlliqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1253 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
iqlighmete-	b2k]b4vsns-	smiling (be ~)		iqlighmetuq \'91he is smiling\'92 / Taawa naqam 
\f2\i iqlighmetngwaaghtuk
\f0\i0 , iiggeput aghulataataghiik angyam imiini. \'91But the whole time they\sub 2\nosupersub  were 
\f2\i smiling
\f0\i0 , shaking hands with everyone in the boat.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:204)													to be smiling		< iqligh(te)-mete-		VK		iqlighmete-	iqlighmete-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqlighte-	b2k]b5ns-	smile		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iqlighayiilliqe-													to smile		PE iqli3-		CK Rub 155 CK		iqlighte-	iqlighte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqlugte-	b2k]/[ns-	gnaw		iqlugtuq \'91he gnawed something\'92; iqlugtaa \'91he gnawed it\'92 /													to gnaw						iqlugte-	iqlugte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqlumghu-,	b2k]/v4e-	doubt		iqlumghuuq \'91he is unsure\'92 / ungipaq iqlumghunaghtuq \'91the news is questionable\'92; iqlumghuyukaak ullghitagni \'91he had doubts about his snowmachine\'92	unsure (be ~ of something)												to doubt; to be unsure of something		PY-S iqlu-				iqlumghu-	iqlumghu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1271 \u1091 -\
iqmiligha-	b2vbkb4f-	cheeks bulge (have so much food in the mouth that the ~)		neqni taam iqmilighatkaa \'91he stuffed his food so much that his cheeks  bulged\'92; neragkiighem repall iqmilighaluni \'91he was eating so fast that his checks bulged\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iiqmig-													to have so much food in the mouth that the cheeks bulge		PY-S iqmi!-		CK A & W 30		iqmiligha-	iqmiligha-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 -\
iqmiqaq	b2vb2f2	appendage, ornament-like, hanging from the side of the mouth of an auklet		kayumun nuluusit iqsaget iiqngikun sukilpaam iqmiqaaneng iqmiqighaqiit \'91the appendages from the sides of the mouth of the auklet are used on the sides of a fishing lure as appendages\'92; kavilngughmeng iqsani iqmiqighluku nulughtuq \'91he fished using red appendages on the sides of his fishing lure\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iiqmig-													ornament-like appendage hanging from the side of the mouth of an auklet		PY-S iqmi!-		CK A & W 30		iqmiqaq	iqmiqaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
iqrag-	b2ifu-	uneven		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  iqragtuq it got uneven; iqragtaa he made it uneven; iqragngaaq \'91it is uneven\'92	distorted												uneven; distorted		PE iqla!-				iqrag-	iqrag-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1075 -\
iqraghqe-	b252s-	crooked (become ~)			distort one\'92s face												to become crooked; to distort one\'92s face	rhbdbncz. dshf;fnm yteljdjkmcndbt vbvbrjq	< iqrag-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -		CK  V & E 173 CK		iqraghqe-	iqraghqe-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
iqragmete-	b2ifuvsns-	crooked (be ~)		iqragmetuq \'91it is crooked or slanted\'92 / 
\f2\i Iqragmetaghngaata
\f0\i0  kakinaqutkegkaagunga, nalikek eight, nine-years-ngulunga. \'91Even though they (the stitches) were 
\f2\i crooked
\f0\i0  I tried to sew all the time when I was eight or nine.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)	slanting (be ~)												to be crooked; to be slanted		< iqrag-mete-				iqragmete-	iqragmete-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqregaghte-	b2isuf5ns-	chip		iqregaghtuq \'91it chipped\'92; iqregaghtaa \'91he chipped it\'92 /													to chip		< iqrek-?-				iqregaghte-	iqregaghte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1096 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqrek	b2isr	tip of pointed object			point	little bit											tip of pointed object; point; little bit		PY-S iq$0k				iqrek	iqrek	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1096 \u1099 \u1082 \
iqsak	b2czr	fish hook			hook (fish ~)												fish hook		PE iqla! or iqya!				iqsak	iqsak	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
iqu-	b2e-	fall over		iquuq \'91he or it fell over \'91/ iqutaa \'91he knocked it over\'92; iquvzightuq \'91it almost fell, he stumbled\'92; ullghitam igleghaviga vega iqustengngwaaghluni \'91the grass on the all-terrain vehicle trail was quite flattened\'92													to fall over		PE iqu-			; > iqunighte-, iqwaagha-	iqu-	iqu-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 -\
iqugte-	b2e[ns-	end		iqugtekan \'91when it comes to an end\'92	come to an end												to end; to come to an end		< iquk-?-				iqugte-	iqugte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iquk	b2er	end		iquga \'91its end\'92	tip												end; tip		PE iqqu3 or iqqu!			\'92; > iqugte-, iqukliq, iqukruk, iquyaq	iquk	iquk	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \
iquklighpigaq	b2e2k]b5gbuf2	end (the very ~)															the very end		< iqukliq-pigaq				iquklighpigaq	iquklighpigaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
iqukliq	b2erk]b2	end (the one at the ~)															the one at the end		< iquk-qliq				iqukliq	iqukliq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
iqukngitaq	b2er3]bnf2	clothes placed next to one lying down for warmth or to block a draft		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 exact meaning?				clothes placed next to one lying down for warmth or to block a draft		< iquk-?-(ng)itaq		CK Rub 156		iqukngitaq	iqukngitaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1187 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
iqukngwaaq	b2er3162	end or edge piece trimmed off of something		iqukngwaaghet neqet qikmimun neghqutkennakesi \'91feed the cut of end or edge pieces of meat to the dogs\'92													end or edge piece trimmed off of something		< iquk-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		VK		iqukngwaq	iqukngwxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
iqukruk	b2erier	end (the very ~)															the very end		< iquk-?-ruk				iqukruk	iqukruk	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1082 \
iqunighte-	b2eyb5ns-	slant			lean	tilt								favor (agree or side with someone)			to slant; to lean; to tilt; to favor (agree or side with someone)		< iqu-?-				iqunighte-	iqunighte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iqusleq	b2eck]s2	bent grass stuck to the ground		nunivagmi iqusleq kaasaqmegteggu quyngim tumanga \'91they came across bent grass in the tundra and found out it was the tracks of reindeer\'92	matted grass												bent grass stuck to the ground; matted grass		< iqu-?		CK A & W 31		iqusleq	iqusleq	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
iqute-	b2ens-	defeat in a wrestling match															to defeat in a wrestling match	gj,t;kfnm d ,jhm,t	< iqu-te\super 1\nosupersub -		CK V & E 99, CK		iqute-	iqute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b iquyaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub b2ez2\'a1	piece of ivory between harpoon point and shaft		
\f2\i this piece is fastened to the shaft	
\f0\i0 harpoon part (piece of ivory between harpoon point and shaft)								
\f2\i  see Harpoon Parts in Appendix				
\f0\i0 piece of ivory between harpoon point and shaft		< iqu-?- (?)				iquyaq1	iquyaq1	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1103 \u1179 1\

\f1\b iquyaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub b2ez2\'99	clam type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 type of clam						iquyaq2	iquyaq2	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1103 \u1179 2\
iqwaagha-	b2164f-	stumble or stagger around		iqwaaghaaq \'91he staggered or stumbled around\'92 /													to stumble or stagger around		< iqu-?-				iqwagha-	iqwxgha-	\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 -\
iriig-	bh7u-	not fall		aghvightami miluqiit ullenghinneghata iriigniiqiit \'91when they play a certain game, the thrown objects that don\'92t fall are said to still be erect\'92; milusaghluku iriigtuq \'91when he threw it, it didn\'92t fall\'92	stay erect	fall (not ~)								erect (stay ~)			to not fall; to stay erect				CK A & W 31		irig-	irxg-	\uc0\u1080 \u1088 \u1251 \u1075 -\
isami-	bcfvb-	pay attention to (him)		isamii \'91she payed attention to him, tended to him\'92 / kukriqnayukan isamiighnaken \'91in case he has difficulty, pay attention to him\'92; uyuqlightaasi isamiighaqluki \'91pay attention to those that are younger than you\'92	tend to (him)												to pay attention to (him); to tend to (him)		PE		CK A & W 31		isami-	isami-	\uc0\u1080 \u1089 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 -\
isavghagh-	bczd4f4-	boat on sea ice using mall sled		isavghaghtut \'91they are moving a boat\'92; isavghaghaat \'91they are moving it\'92 / = esavghagh-													to move boat on sea ice using small sled		PE isav!a3				isavghagh-	isavghagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
isavghaq	bczd4f2	person moving a boat on sea ice using a small sled		= esavghaq													person moving a boat on sea ice using a small sled		PE isav!a3				isavghaq	isavghaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
iseki	bcsrb	cold (how ~!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle; said when coming into contact with cold liquid or solid													
\f0\i0 how cold!		PE it90				iseki	iseki	\uc0\u1080 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1080 \
isekinagh-	bcsrbyf4-	cold (be ~ to the touch (of water, metal, etc.))		isekinaghtuq \'91it feels cold\'92 / isekinaghtaa \'91it got cold\'92													to be cold to the touch (of water, metal, etc.)		< iseki-nagh-				isekinagh-	isekinagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
isi, isigima	bcb. bcbubvf	thought (I ~ (mistakenly) that)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 \'85 
\f2\i isi
\f0\i0  keviiwaqelghii quyngim keviqaqegkanga 
\f2\i isigima
\f0\i0 . Liitngwaaghlunga piyalghiinga aghveghwaaqeftuq aghvengllaqaghhaq. \'91\'85 
\f2\i I thought
\f0\i0  it was a sausage, stuffed with reindeer, 
\f2\i so it seemed
\f0\i0 . After I learned what was what I realized that it was a figurine or a whale, an image of a whale. (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:144); Taagken neghulluta, apeghiighluta, elngaataall, 
\f2\i isigimaqun
\f0\i0  laluramkestun ayuqumalghiit nangaghneghit ... neghnaqillghit, sangighquqayuget. Tipelelget, salget. \'91Then we ate, afterwards, 
\f2\i it sure seemed to me
\f0\i0 , that their customs where like that of the white people \'85 the way they eat, how they washed the dishes. They had tables and other such things.' (PANGEGH. 3)	seemed (it ~ that)												I thought (mistakenly) that; it seemed that		PE ici!\super w\nosupersub a				isi, isigima	isi, isigima	\uc0\u1080 \u1089 \u1080 , \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \
isiqaghte-	bcb2f5ns-	splash		isiqaghtuq \'91he splashed himself\'92; isiqaghtaa \'91he splashed her\'92 / = esiqaghte-													to splash		PE ciq03- and ciq(q)i-				isiqaghte-	isiqaghte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
isiqghute-	bcb25ens-	toss out liquid		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  isiqaghte-	throw out liquid												to toss out liquid; to throw out liquid		PE ciq03- and ciq(q)i-				isiqghute-	isiqghute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
isiqghuute-	bcb258ns-	fall into the water with a splash		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  isiqaghte-													to fall into the water with a splash		PE ciq03- and ciq(q)i-				isiqghute-	isiqghxte-	\uc0\u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1203 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
itag-	bnfu-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > itagnagh-, itagsi-, itagtaq, itake-																			itag-	itag-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 -\
itagnagh-	bnfuyf4-	okay (be ~)		itagnaghsiin? \'91are you okay?\'92; Taaqluni nanevgaam iitghesqumayaqanga ingleghmun. Mekelghiighem pimakanga, "
\f2\i Itagnaghtunga
\f0\i0  whani qavaghllequnga."  \'91Finally the old man told him to come in to the sleeping area. The boy answered him, \'93I\'92m 
\f2\i okay
\f0\i0  (where I am), I\'92ll sleep here.\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 68)	satisfactory (be ~)	acceptable (be ~)											to be okay; to be satisfactory; to be acceptable		< itag-naq				itagnagh-	itagnagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
itagnaghhalek	bnfuyf5fksr	fine (so ~!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle	
\f0\i0 satisfactory (so ~!)												so fine!; so satisfactory!		< itagnagh-ghhalek				itagnaghhalek	itagnaghhalek	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
itagnaghi-	bnfuyf4b-	recover			acceptable (become ~)	get well or get enough to be satisfied								satisfied (get enough to be ~)			to recover; to get well; to get enough to feel satisfied; to become acceptable		< itagnagh-i\super 2\nosupersub -				itagnaghi-	itagnaghi-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1080 -\
itagnaghyug-	bnfuyf4m/u-	feel satisfied			satisfied (feel ~)												to feel satisfied		< itagnagh-yug- (?)				itagnaghyug-	itagnaghyug-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
itagnatun	bnfuyfney	satisfactorily		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 appropriately	acceptably											in a satisfactory way; satisfactorily; appropriately; acceptably		< itagnagh-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 itagnatun	itagnatun	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
itagsi-	bnf[cb-	thrifty (be ~)		itagsiiq \'91he is thrifty, not wasteful\'92 / itagsineq \'91thrifty person\'92	wasteful (not be ~)												to be thrifty; to not be wasteful		< itag-?-				itagsi-	itagsi-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 -\
itagtaq	bnf[nf2	special occasion (something saved as later use or for a ~)		itagtat iqalluget gaaghii aghnam eltughani birthday-yan \'91the woman cooked the salmon that she had saved up when her grandchild had a birthday\'92	saved (something ~)												something saved (as for later use or for a special occasion)		< itag-?-aq				itagtaq	itagtaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
itake-	bnfrs-	take care of (self, clothes, belongings, etc.)		itakuq \'91he was careful with himself, took care of himself; itakaa \'91he took care of it, saved it\'92 /	save for later use	conserve											to take care of (self, clothes, belongings, etc.); to save for later use; to conserve		< itag-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				itake-	itake-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
itararat, itararay	bnfhfhfn. bnfhfhfq	danger!		
\f2\i particle; signals real or imagined danger 
\f0\i0 (?)													danger!		from Chukchi ?	x			itararat, itararay	itararat, itararay	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1090 , \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1253 \
itegaastagh-	bnsu6cnf4-	hit on the foot with rock, bullet, arrow, etc.															to hit on the foot with rock, bullet, arrow, etc.		< iteg-?-				itegastagh-	itegxstagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u257 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
itegaastaghmig-	bnsu6cnf4vbu-	catch with claws or talons															to catch with claws or talons		< itegaastagh-mig-				itegastaghmig-	itegxstaghmig-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u257 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
itegaq	bnsuf2	foot		
\f2\i may be used in the plural for a person's two feet: 
\f0\i0 iteganka \'91my feet\'92; Aghvemta suqaa qula 
\f2\i itegaghtutkaftuq
\f0\i0 . \'91The baleen on our whale was ten 
\f2\i feet
\f0\i0  long.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 155)													foot		PE iti!a3; < iteg-ghaq				itegaq	itegaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
itegayaaq	bnsufc92	slipper															slipper		< itegaq-yaaq				itegayaq	itegayxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
itegh-	bns4-	go in		iteghtuq \'91he entered\'92; iitghaa \'91he entered it\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he moved into it\'92 /	enter	move in											to go in; to enter; to move in		PE it03-			 > igeghagh-, iteghsigh-, igeghvik, itghute-, iitghute-, iitqiinagh-	itegh-	itegh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 -\
iteghaghwaagh-	bns4f41f4164-	submerge (of whales)															to submerge (of whales)		< itegh-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -				iteghaghwagh-	iteghaghwxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
itegherki-	bns4shrb-	move back and forth or in and out		qunganganun itegherkiluteng nunavangumalghiit \'91they went in and out of open water among the ice floes  and they got to a herd of walrus\'92; itegherkiluteng mellasimakangi \'91they went in and out (of the ice) and they got stuck in there\'92	back and forth (move ~)	in and out (move ~)											to move back and forth or in and out; to go by boat betweem ice floes		< itegh-?-		CK A & W 31		itegherki-	itegherki-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1088 \u1082 \u1080 -\
itegherqi	bns4si2b	lunch		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 dinner												lunch; dinner				CK Rub 179		itegherqi	itegherqi	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1096 \u1179 \u1080 \
iteghsigh-	bns5cb4-	move into a house															to move into a house		< itegh-sigh-				iteghsigh-	iteghsigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
iteghvik	bns4dbr	entrance			opening for something to go in												entrance; opening for something to go in		< itegh-vik				iteghvik	iteghvik	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
iteghwaghwaagh-	bns41f4164-	submerge (of whales)															to submerge (of whales)		< itegh-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -				iteghwaghwagh-	iteghwaghwxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
itegmig-	bnsuvbu-	kick		itegmigaa \'91he kicked it\'92 /													to kick		PE it0!mi!-; < iteg-mig-				itegmig-	itegmig-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
itegmignaq	bnsuvbuyf2	ball game		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 soccer												ball game; soccer	buhf d vzx; aen,jk	< itegmig-naq		CK V & E 99; Rub 178		itegmignaq	itegmignaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
itegmigute-	bnsuvbuens-	trip and fall			kick against something												to trip and fall; to kick against something		< itegmig-(u)te-				itegmigute-	itegmigute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
itegmilqutaghaq	bnsuvbk]2enf4f2	snow, newly fallen		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); questioned									
\f0\i0 check; it doesn\'92t fit with itegmig- \'91to kick\'92				newly-fallen snow	gjhjif	 < itegmig-? (?)		Rub. 178		itegmilqutaghaq	itegmilqutaghaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
itegsineq	bns[cbys2	skin and blubber at crease of whale tail			whale fluke used as pretend whale (by children?)												skin and blubber at crease of whale tail; whale fluke used as pretend whale (by children?)		< itek-?		VK		itegsineq	itegsineq	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
itek	bnsr	toecap of skin-boot															toecap of skin-boot		PE it0!			> itegaq, itegmig-, iitga	itek	itek	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
iteme-	bnsvs-	come undone or untied		itemuq \'91it came undone\'92 / itemtaa \'91he undid it\'92; = ileme-	undone (come ~)	untied (come ~)											to come undone; to come untied		PY it0m0-			; > itemqugh-	iteme-	iteme-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 -\
itemqugh-	bnsv2e4-	take apart		itemqughaa \'91he took it apart\'92	disassemble												to take apart; to disassemble		< iteme-qugh-				itemqugh-	itemqugh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
itemquusiq	bnsv28cb2	screwdriver															screwdriver		< itemqugh-(u)siq				itemqusiq	itemqxsiq	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1179 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
itenwaati	bnsy16nb	person living a family not his/her own		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 lodger	tenant							check for exact spelling and if used on SLI				person living with a family not his/her own; lodger; tenant		from Chukchi et0nwat0l\'920n \'91one without his own home; tenant\'92	14	deR. 350; Rub 179		itenwati	itenwxti	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \u1265 \u257 \u1090 \u1080 \
itghagh-	bn5f4-	go further inward			inward (go further ~)												to go further inward		< itegh-?-				itghagh-	itghagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
itghaghwaghwaagh-	bn5f41f4164-	submerge (of whales)															to submerge (of whales)		< itghag-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -				itghaghwaghwagh-	itghaghwaghwxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
itghute-	bn5ens-	bring in		itghutaa \'91he brought it in\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iitghute-													to bring in		 < itegh-(u)te-				itghute-	itghute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
itghuugute-	bn5euens-	wet (get ~)		amiiraq meghmi itghuugusimaa \'91the seal skin got soaked in the water\'92	soaked (be ~)												to get wet; to be soaked				CK A & W 31		itghugute-	itghxgute-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
itineq	bnbys2	ice protuding out beneath the water\'92s surface from the bottom of a floe or ice field		
\f2\i see item 20 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												ice protuding out beneath the water\'92s surface from the bottom of a floe or ice field						itineq	itineq	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
itugigh-	bneub4-	milk (as in milking a cow)		aghnaghaam itugighaqaa kaakw \'91the girl is milking the cow\'92; itugighta \'91milkmaid\'92													to milk		< ituk-(ng)igh-				itugigh-	itugigh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ituk	bner	milk (of cow, dog, seal, walrus, but not human)															milk (of cow, dog, seal, walrus, but not human)		PE itu!				ituk	ituk	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \
itupill	bnegbk]	perhaps it's better that		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Entaqun kiyaghneghem meghmi tuqusnegha ighlekaanga. 
\f2\i Itupill
\f0\i0  quutmi tuqusqesimakanganga. \'91Maybe God doesn\'92t want me to die in the water. He wants me 
\f2\i preferably
\f0\i0  to die on land.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 10)	preferably												perhaps it's better that; preferably		from Chukchi et\'92opel \'91better\'92				itupill	itupill	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \
itupilqun	bnegbk]2ey	perhaps		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 preferably												perhaps; preferably		< itupill=qun				itupilqun	itupilqun	\uc0\u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
ivagh-	bdf4-	search for		ivaghtuq \'91he (child usually) misses someone (parents usually)\'92; ivaghaa \'91he is searching for it or her, misses (and looks for) her\'92 / ivaghiiq \'91he is searching for something or someone\'92	miss (and look for)	look for											to search for; to miss (and look for); to look for		PE iva3-			ivaghniighta	ivagh-	ivagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ivaghniigh-	bdf4y74-	hunt		Sazinga? Tagneghtestaghpenga, uyavaneng, esghaghaqnaghaatnga ukazit, afsengaat. Natenngam 
\f2\i ivaghiniighnaqsinga?
\f0\i0  Nalluniighutestaghpenga! \'91What have you done to me? You\'92ve made me black; from the distance the hares and mice can see me. How can I 
\f2\i hunt?
\f0\i0  You\'92ve made me very visible!\'92 (AANGHHAQ 28)													to hunt		< ivagh-niigh-				ivaghnigh-	ivaghnxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
ivaghniighta	bdf4y75nf	hunter															hunter		< ivaghniigh-(s)ta				ivaghnighta	ivaghnxghta	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
ivaghulluk	bdf4ek]/r	prayer song sung by or for boat captain at whaling time			song, (prayer ~ sung by or for boat captain at whaling time)												prayer song sung by or for boat captain at whaling time		< ivagh-(u)n-lluk				ivaghulluk	ivaghulluk	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
ivaghutaq	bdf4enf2	prayer song sung by or for boat captain at whaling time			song, (prayer ~ sung by or for boat captain at whaling time)												prayer song sung by or for boat captain at whaling time		< ivagh-(u)taq				ivaghutaq	ivaghutaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ivalu	bdfk/	sinew															sinew		PE ivalu				ivalu	ivalu	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \
ivalungqughruk	bdfk/32e4her	tendon															tendon		< ivalu-?-quq-ruk				ivalungqughruk	ivalungqughruk	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
ivegh-	bds4-	wade		iveghtuq \'91he waded\'92; iivghaa \'91he waded it\'92 /													to wade		PE iv03- and ip03-				ivegh-	ivegh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 -\
ivenrugh-	bdsyhe4-	operate an outboard motor		ivenrughtuq \'91he is operating the motor \'91/ 
\f2\i this verb is a back formation from the noun 
\f0\i0 ivenruuta
\f2\i  (q.v.); 
\f0\i0 Taan\'92gavek 
\f2\i ivenrughtukut
\f0\i0  elngaatall malghugneghuluta. \'91We were in two boats when we left using our 
\f2\i motors
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:116); 
\f2\i also used in Chukotka as a verb	
\f0\i0 outboard motor (operate an ~)	motor (operate an outboard ~)								go by boat powered by a motor			to operate an outboard motor; to go by a boat powered by a motor				V&E108		ivenrugh-	ivenrugh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1085 \u1088 \u1091 \u1271 -\
ivenrughta	bdsyhe5nf	outboard motor operator			person who operates outboard motor												person who operates outboard motor	vjnjhbcn	< ivenrugh-(s)ta		CK V & E 100 (Russin vocab)		ivenrughta	ivenrughta	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1085 \u1088 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
ivenruuta, ivenruun	bdsyh8nf. bdsyh8y	outboard motor		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka; may be used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 ivenruutek, 
\f2\i for one motor; 
\f0\i0 ivenruutegka seghleghuuk \'91my motor is bad\'92; 
\f2\i though from an American brand-name this word has been intruduced in Chukotka since Soviet times; the form 
\f0\i0 ivenruun
\f2\i  is a back formation from the dual or plural	
\f0\i0 motor, outboard												outboard motor		from English brandname \'91Evinrude\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R136, V&E108)		
\f0\i0 ivenruta, ivenrun	ivenrxta, ivenrxn	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1085 \u1088 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 , \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1085 \u1088 \u1263 \u1085 \
ivgagh-	bduf4-	come around a corner or into the room		ivgaghtuq \'91he came or went around the corner\'92; ivgaghaa \'91he came or went around it (corner or the like)\'92/	go around a corner or into the room												to come or go around the corner; to come or go into the room		PE i!va3-				ivgagh-	ivgagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ivgagha-	bduf4f-	trance (be in a ~)		ivgaghaaq \'91he is in a trance\'92 /													to be in a trance (usually alone)		< ivgagh-?-				ivgagha-	ivgagha-	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 -\
ivgaghneq	bduf4ys2	wind blowing around a cliff or from the side			east and aorth wind	ocean ice that goes around Northwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.											wind blowing around a cliff or from the side; ocean ice that goes around Northwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.; east and aorth wind	dtnth. leeobq e crfk. bp-pf crfks\\ ,jrjdjq dtnth	< ivgagh-neq\super 2		\nosupersub CK V & E; Slwooko, Oozeva		ivgaghneq	ivgaghneq	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
ivgaghutkaq	bduf4enrf2	ice that flows from the south in spring when sea is mostly ice-free		
\f2\i may be used in dual, 
\f0\i0 ivgaghutkak; ivgaghutkagnguq nunavagllaguuk \'91the ice that came (to Gambell from the south) is said have a lot of walrus\'92; 
\f2\i see item 21 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												ice that flows from the south in spring when sea is mostly ice-free		< ivgagh-(u)n-kaq		CK A & W 31		ivgaghutkaq	ivgaghutkaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
Ivgaq	Bduf2	Eevwak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Eevwak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		< ivgagh-				Ivgaq	Ivgaq	\uc0\u1048 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
ivgeghreghugh-	bdus4hs4e4-	strong wind comes around a point or projection of land		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ivgagh-													for a strong wind to come around a point or projection of land						ivgeghreghugh-	ivgeghreghugh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1271 -\
ivghaagh-	bd464-	wade around		ivghaaghtuq \'91he waded around\'92 /													to wade around		 < ivegh-?-				ivghagh-	ivghxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 -\
ivgheghruk	bv4s4her	wind at cliff coming from various directions		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 wind at cliff coming from various directions		< ivghagh-ruk (?)		CK Rub 135		ivgheghruk	ivgheghruk	\uc0\u1080 \u1084 \u1271 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
ivi	bdb	singer, ceremonial		
\f2\i Ivinguut 
\f0\i0 aghnat aqumuulluteng. Aqumutiighluki aquutam taam kelukaghaakun. \'91The women were 
\f2\i ceremonial singers
\f0\i0  and would sit toghether. They\'92d sit right behind the steering oar.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:218); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iviiq													one of a group of clan women sitting in front of the captain\'92s house and singing whaling songs						ivi	ivi	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \
Ivighnaq	Bdb4yf2	Evghinak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Evghinak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Ivighnaq	Ivighnaq	\uc0\u1048 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
iviigh-	bd74-	celebrate a certain ceremony in which a group of clan women sing after a whale has been caught 			whale (celebrate a certain ceremony in which a group of clan women sing after a ~ has been caught)												to celebrate a certain ceremony in which a group of clan women sing after a whale has been caught 						ivigh-	ivxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 -\
iviighun	bd74ey	song (ceremonial ~ sung after a whale has been caught)			ceremonial song sung after a whale has been caught	whale (ceremonial song sung after a ~ has been caught)											ceremonial song sung after a whale has been caught		< iviigh-(u)n				ivighun	ivxghun	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
iviiq	bd72	ceremony after a whale has been caught in which a group of clan women sing		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ivi	whale catch ceremony												a certain ceremony after a whale has been caught in which a group of clan women sing						iviq	ivxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1251 \u1179 \
ivilengestaq	bdbks3scnf2	razor clamshell			clamshell (razor ~)	shell of razor clam											razor clam shell		< ivilu-ngestaq				ivilengestaq	ivilengestaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ivilu	bdbk/	clamshell			clam												clamshell; clam		PE uvilu3				ivilu	ivilu	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \
ivisa	bdbcz	flounder			halibut												flounder; halibut		from Chukchi ewec, pl. ewec0t \'91white fish\'92	02, 14			ivisa	ivisa	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \

\f1\b ivrestuuna\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub bdhscn8yf\super s	\nosupersub grindstone		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E); used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 ivrestuunek,
\f2\i  for one such device	
\f0\i0 sharpener	whetstone											grindstone; sharpener	vt[fybxtcrjt bkb "ktrhbxtcrjt njxbkj	probably from English \'91emery stone\'92	x	CK V & E 83; Rub 136		ivrestunae	ivrestxnae	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1088 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1263 \u1085 \u1072 \u1099 \
ivrestuune-	bdhscn8ys-	sharpen with a grindstone or whetstone		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to sharpen with a whetstone		probably from English \'91emery stone\'92	x	Rub 136		ivrestune-	ivrestxne-	\uc0\u1080 \u1074 \u1088 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1263 \u1085 \u1099 -\
iwernga	b1sh3f	but then		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  eslallugughtesugnisaghaa iwernga siqinghuughtaa \'91it looked like it was going to rain but then the sun began to shine\'92; Ungipaghaninguq imani nenglumelnguq taana aghnaghaghhaq ellnginaghhaalghii, 
\f2\i iwernga
\f0\i0  aghnaghaghpaggaaghtekaq, anglighpakaghhaq.
\f1\b  
\f0\b0 \'91Among the stories of long ago, there was a girl alone in an underground house, 
\f2\i but fortunately
\f0\i0  she was a grown-up girl.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:29); Nenglum ulimallghanun nuughtuutkaagunga. Nallukanka enkaam. 
\f2\i Iwernga
\f0\i0  iignallu Qaygeghtaankut mangteghiita ukakaghaanilnguq Waamquutem allgeghvikeftaa. \'91I missed out on the building of the underground houses. And so, I don't know about them. 
\f2\i But
\f0\i0  that (ruin) over there that is closer than Qaygeghtaq's house was where Waamquun was born.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:10)	only	anyway								however			but then; only; yet; anyway; however		from Chukchi ew0r0nk0 \'91at once, momentarily\'92 (maybe)				iwernga	iwernga	\uc0\u1080 \u1265 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1072 \
iwerngangam	b1sh3f3fv	but then whenever		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  iwerngangam sakengneghmini tuunaqaa \'91but then whenever he gets something he gives some to her\'92													but then whenever		< iwernga=ngam				iwerngangam	iwerngangam	\uc0\u1080 \u1265 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
iwerngaqun	b1sh3f2ey	but		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  iwerngaqun aghtughaa itghunneghmeng \'91he just couldn't bring him inside\'92	couldn\'92t (just ~)												but; just couldn\'92t		< iwernga=qun				iwerngaqun	iwerngaqun	\uc0\u1080 \u1265 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
iwhani	b1[fyb	and so		
\f2\i particle; used when one is groping for the right words to express his thoughts;  
\f0\i0 Uukat kinenghhat, 
\f2\i iwhani
\f0\i0  pinipigtut 
\f2\i September
\f0\i0 -em uukaghtii. Kineghllagtestegpenaki qeghaataqelghiit eghqwaaghutkaghqaaluki. \'91\'93Atlantic\'94 cod that had just dried, 
\f2\i let's see
\f0\i0 , are really good when are caught in September. Before they would get too dry they would be bundled and stored.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:92); Aqaa 
\f2\i iwhanit
\f0\i0  aghnaqeghrugaat, Pagaliit. Pagaliit Tuusaankuk Akumutaankuk panigak. 
\f1\b \'91
\f0\b0 Aqaa was a, 
\f2\i uhm
\f0\i0 , beloved woman of the Pagaliit clan. She was the daughter of Tuusaq and Akumutaq.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:22);
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 =
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 piwhani	let\'92s see now												and so; let\'92s see now		from Chukchi ?	x			iwhani	iwhani	\uc0\u1080 \u1265 \u1093 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
iwhani-	b[1fyb-	do like that		used when groping for, or when one can\'92t think of, the right words; Maana aagraten tamaakut tanughqaqegkangit. Tanughqelluki maanaaqluki sameng 
\f2\i iwhaniiqluki
\f0\i0  (sateglluki sallegtaqegkangit). \'91Well, they used to scru their floorings in the main living rooms. They scrub them and do like this, and 
\f2\i do like that
\f0\i0  (clean them, they used to scrape them).\'92 (MRS. DELLA W. 22)													to do like that						iwhani-	iwhani-	\uc0\u1080 \u1093 \u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 -\

\f1\b iya\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub bz\super s	\nosupersub eye		iiska \'91my eye\'92; iyegka \'91my eyes\sub 2\nosupersub \'92; iiynga \'91his or its eye\'92; iiskek \'91his or its eyes\sub 2\nosupersub \'92; iyek aanqaghngalghiik \'91bulging eyes\'92; iyek pelleghmelnguuk \'91wide set eyes\'92; sikuq iistuqaq \'91needle with a big eye\'92	eye of needle												eye; eye of a needle		EP 090				iyae	iyae	\uc0\u1080 \u1103 \u1099 \
iyagh-	bqf4-	design (make a ~)		= igagh-
\f2\i  (q.v. for details, derivatives, etc.)	
\f0\i0 write	tattoo (apply a ~)								school (go to ~)			to make a design; to write; to apply a tattoo; to go to school						iyagh-	iyagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iyamsiqa-	bzvcb2f-	thankful		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  igamsiqayugtuq \'91he is thankful\'92; igamisiqayugvikaa \'91he expressed his thankfulness to her, he thanked her\'92; igamsiqayugutkaa \'91he is thankful for it\'92; igamsiqanaq \'91something that makes one thankful\'92; igamsiqanaghtuq \'91it makes one thankful\'92; = igamsiqa-	grateful												thankful; grateful		PY-S i!a-				iyamsiqa-	iyamsiqa-	\uc0\u1080 \u1103 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 -\
iyamsiqanaghhalek	bzvcb2fyf5fksr	thank you very much		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 =  igamsiqanaghhalek	grateful (oh, how ~ that makes one!)												thank you very much; oh, how grateful that makes one!		< iyamsiqa-naq-ghhalek				iyamsiqanaghhalek	iyamsiqanaghhalek	\uc0\u1080 \u1103 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
iyaq	bz2	design		= igaq
\f2\i  (q.v. for derivatives)	
\f0\i0 tattoo (especially on a man's arm after he has caught a whale)	book								schooling			design; tattoo (especially on a man's arm after he has caught a whale); book; schooling		PY-S i!aq				iyaq	iyaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1103 \u1179 \
iyarutaagh-	bzhen64-	drill a hole		iyarutaaghtuq \'91he drilled a hole\'92; iyarutaaghaa \'91he drilled a hole in it\'92 / = igarutaagh-													to drill a hole						iyarutagh-	iyarutxgh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1103 \u1088 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
iyarutaaq	bzhen62	drill		
\f2\i also dual, 
\f0\i0 iyarutaaghek
\f2\i , for one drill; 
\f0\i0 = igarutaaq													drill		PE ni!09u3un (under PE ni!09u3-)				iyarutaq	iyarutxq	\uc0\u1080 \u1103 \u1088 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
iyatagh-	bznf4-	hungry (be ~)		iyataghtuq \'91he is hungry\'92 / = igatagh-													to be hungry						iyatagh-	iyatagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iyataghnaq	bznf4yf2	famine		= igataghnaq													famine		< iyatagh-naq				iyataghnaq	iyataghnaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
iyegaata	bqsu6nf	eyeglasses		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 iyegaatek, 
\f2\i  for one pair of glasses;
\f0\i0  iyegaatelghutak \'91glasses case\'92	glasses (eyeglasses)												eyeglasses		< iya-?				iyegata	iyegxta	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1075 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \
iyegaatelek	bqsu6nsksr	spectacled eider			
\f2\i Somateria fischeri	
\f0\i0 eider, spectacled											spectacled eider
\f2\i  (Somateria fischeri)		
\f0\i0 maybe a calque on English;  < iyegaate(k)-lek				iyegatelek	iyegxtelek	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1075 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
iyeksak	bqsrczr	starfish															starfish		< iya-krak (?)				iyeksak	iyeksak	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
iyellugmete-	bqsk]/uvsns-	eyesight (have bad ~)		iyellugmetuq \'91he has bad eyesight\'92 / 	bad eyesight (have ~)												to have bad eyesight		< iyelluk-mete-		VK		iyellugmete-	iyellugmete-	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
iyelluk	bqsk]/r	eye trouble			diseased or otherwise bad eye												eye trouble; diseased or otherwise bad eye		< iya-lluk				iyelluk	iyelluk	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
iyem qalighaga	bqsv 2fkb4fuf	cornea															cornea		< iya\super e\nosupersub -
\f2\i relative 
\f0\i0 + qalighak-
\f2\i possessed		
\f0\i0 < SLI Cur. Man. 81	xxxq	iyem qalighaga	iyem qalighaga	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084  \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \
iyengekestagh-	bqs3srscnf4-	eyes to begin to open (as of a puppy)															for one's eyes to begin to open (as of a puppy)		< iya-nge-kestagh-				iyengekestagh-	iyengekestagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iyesughnagh-	bqsc/4yf4-	irritating to the eyes (be ~)															to be irritating to the eyes		< iya-?-naq				iyesughnagh-	iyesughnagh-	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
iyetaq	bqsnf2	smoke-hole in roof of house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 smoke-hole in roof of house		< iya-taq\super 1		\nosupersub CK Rub 149		iyetaq	iyetaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
iyeveli-	bqsdskb-	cat\'92s cradle (make the eyes figure in ~)															to make the eyes figure in a game of cat\'92s cradle		< iya\super e\nosupersub -?		VK		iyeveli-	iyeveli-	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 -\
iyevleghun	bqsdks4ey	ring around the eye or dot above the eye (usually of a dog)															ring around the eye or dot above the eye (usually of a dog)		< iya-?-(u)n				iyevleghun	iyevleghun	\uc0\u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
ka	rf	ouch!		= keka, ka em; 
\f2\i exclamatory particle; 
\f0\i0 ka, amigkun qumsekegtunga \'91ouch, I got pinched with the door\'92													ouch!		PE aka(a) and ak0ka				ka	ka	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \
ka em	rf sv	ouch!		= keka, ka em; 
\f2\i exclamatory particle; 
\f0\i0 ka em, kaapqaghtung sikughqun \'91ouch, I poked myself with a needle\'92													ouch!		PE aka(a) and ak0ka			xxxe	ka em	ka em	\uc0\u1082 \u1072  \u1099 \u1084 \
kaa	r6	oh!		
\f2\i exclamatory particle; expresses excitement or surprise or pleasure; 
\f0\i0 whaaqruk elpek qenwatlu \'91oh, you\'92re here at last\'92; kaa, sangaawa allaaghllugaq? oh, what is that unique thing?; kaa, taawallu maaten saqeghllaataghta seghleghnaghhalek \'91oh, the horrid thing that happened to him\'92													oh!						ka	kx	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \
kaaghte-	r65ns-	let the current drift a boat or an animal carcass		unangkani kaaghfikluku tugumakanga \'91he let the current drift the seal that he caught, and then he retrieved it\'92; kaaghsimaluki pugleghumii \'91when they were drifting  (in their boat), an animal surfaced\'92													to let the current drift a boat or an animal carcass				CK A & W 33		kaghte-	kxghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kaagkaq	r6[rf2	crown of head		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  kakek													crown of head		PE kaka&ca3				kagkaq	kxgkaq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
kaagusiq	r6uecb2	club (for striking or hitting)															club (for striking or hitting)		< kaaw-(u)siq				kagusiq	kxgusiq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kaakaa	r6r6	hush!		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 quiet!												hush!; quiet!		PY kaa(kaa)				kaka	kxkx	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1082 \u257 \
kaakaangam	r6r63fv	quiet down now!		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 quiet down now!		< kaakaa=ngam				kakangam	kxkxngam	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1082 \u257 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
kaakw	r6r1	cow		= kaawa; kaawet \'91cows\'92; 
\f2\i the singular, 
\f0\i0 kaakw, 
\f2\i is a back formation from the plural which is also the plural of the alternate singular,
\f0\i0  kaawa, 
\f2\i which is the form borrowed from English; dairy cows were brought to the village of Sireniki in Chukotka which explains why this word is also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 cow		from English \'91cow\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R207, V&E59)		
\f0\i0 kakw	kxkw	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1082 \u1265 \
kaakwaq	r6r1f2	broken ice		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 broken ice	,bns7 ktl			CK V & E 24		kakwaq	kxkwaq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1082 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
Kaalghet	R6k4sn	cliffs (on Owalit Mt. and/or Iveka Mt. and Bunnell Cape  on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 cliffs (on Owalit Mt. and/or Iveka Mt. and Bunnell Cape  on St. Lawrence Is.)						Kalghet	Kxlghet	\uc0\u1050 \u257 \u1083 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \
kaalghutaq	r6k4enf2	cow-shed		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 barn								probably should be included on account of the presence of cows in Yupik villages in Chukotka!				cow-shed; barn	rjhjdybr	< kaakw-lghutaq		Rub. 194		kalghutaq	kxlghutaq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kaalgugh-	r6kue4-	haul dead whale or the like to shore		kaalgughtut \'91they hauled a dead whale to shore\'92; kaalgughaat \'91they hauled it to shore\'92 /													to haul dead whale or the like to shore		PE kal0!\super 1\nosupersub - and kal0t-				kalgugh-	kxlgugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kaalguun, kaalguutaq	r6ku8y. r6ku8nf2	hauling rope			rope for hauling												hauling rope		< kaalgugh-(u)n, kaalgugh-(u)taq				kalgun	kxlgxn	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1083 \u1075 \u1263 \u1085 , \u1082 \u257 \u1083 \u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kaalguusiq	r6ku8cb2	hauling rope			rope for hauling												hauling rope		< kaalgugh-(u)siq				kalgusiq	kxlgxsiq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1083 \u1075 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kaallataqu-	r6k]znf2e-	arrive safely or opportunely		kaallataquukut taawa qagingughtesteghllagpenaan \'91we arrived safely before the surf on the beach got too high\'92													to arrive safely or opportunely		< kaate-?-				kallataqu-	kxllataqu-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\

\f1\b kaama\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub r6vf\super s	\nosupersub chewing gum			gum (chewing ~)												chewing gum		from English \'91gum\'92	SLI			kamae	kxmae	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
kaame-	r6vs-	chew gum		kaamuq \'91he chewed gum\'92	gum (chew ~)												to chew gum		from English \'91gum\'92	SLI			kame-	kxme-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1084 \u1099 -\
kaamgalugte-	r6vufke[ns-	go to get (repeatedly ~ someone without success)		taginayukavek nalugvigmun kaamgalugtunga, iiwenwha aviitaquten \'91I went to the airport over and over in case you came in, but you weren\'92t there\'92; elngaatall kaamgalugutkamken \'91I keep on coming back for you\'92													to repeatedly go to get someone without success				CK A & W 33		kamgalugte-	kxmgalugte-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1084 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kaamwaaq	r6v162	coltsfoot plant			
\f2\i Petasites frigidus												
\f0\i0 coltsfoot plant (Petasites frigidus)		< kamek-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				kamwaq	kxmwxq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1084 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
kaana 	r6yf	one down there, near the water, to the west		
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  kan-; 
\f2\i restricted demonstrative pronoun; 
\f0\i0  
\f2\i relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 katum \'91(of) the one down there\'92;
\f2\i  absolutive/relative plural:
\f0\i0  kaankut \'91the ones down there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative: 
\f0\i0 kaanyuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kasuq \'91you, down there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: 
\f0\i0 teskana 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  eskana \'91that one down there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 kanani \'91in the area down there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb: 
\f0\i0 kanavek \'91to down there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 kaan'ggun \'91through down there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb: 
\f0\i0 kaanken 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kanaken \'91from down there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional: 
\f0\i0 kana \'91there (down there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 teskanani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  eskanani \'91there, down there\'92; kaan\'92ggun kaasimaat \'91they arrived down there; kaan\'92ggun tugugu \'91take a hold of it down there (as on the lower part of it)\'92	down there (one ~)	water (one near the water ~)								west (one toward ~)			that one down there, near the water, to the west		PE dem. kan or ka9				kana 	kxna 	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1085 \u1072 \
kaangqite-	r632bns-	snow or dust to gets into the scalp, fur, or feathers		kaangqitaa \'91snow or dust got into it\'92 / puvitenka umegneghmi kaangqisimii \'91snow got deep in my ruff in the storm\'92; temkaagka kaangqitkak pegnem ufsugagka \'91snow really got in my seal skin pants; I barely could shake it off\'92													for snow or dust to get into the scalp, fur, or feathers				CK A & W 33		kangqite-	kxngqite-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kaangquq	r632e2	core of tree		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 akangquq	knot in wood	leader of village, group, etc.								headquarters			core of tree; knot in wood; leader of village, group, etc.; headquarters		PY ka&quq (under PE ka&03); < kangeq-quq				kangquq	kxngquq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
kaangqwagh-	r6231f4-	cross water or land by jumping from rock to rock or ice block to ice block		kaangqwaghtuq \'91he jumped his way across\'92; kaangqwaghaa \'91he jumped his way across it\'92 / Sikuqwaaghhaat aghuliighwaaghluteng llangaqa suupeliighmi saltine cracker-et pugleghalghiit. Mekelghiighhaam ataasim pimakangi ilani, \'93
\f2\i Kaangqwaalta
\f0\i0  yeqay, sikut aghuliitnghwaaghtut!\'94\'92 \'91The ice floes were stationary like saltine crackers floating in soup. One boy said to his fellows, \'93
\f2\i Let\'92s cross jumping from piece to piece
\f0\i0 , as the ice floes are stationary!\'94\'92 (KALLAG. 82)													to cross water or land by jumping from rock to rock or ice block to ice block						kangqwagh-	kxngqwagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1179 \u1187 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kaanguq	r63e2	snow goose			goose (snow ~)	
\f2\i Chen caerulescens											
\f0\i0 snow goose (Chen caerulescens)		PE ka&u3				kanguq	kxnguq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
kaape-	r6gs-	stab		kaapuq \'91he poked himself; he got a shot (inoculation)\'92; kaapaa \'91he poked it; he gave her a shot; pierced it (the whale)\'92 / kaaputuq \'91he poked something\'92; kaaputaa \'91he poked something into it;  he tacked something onto it\'92	poke	pierce a whale with a harpoon								inoculate			to stab; to poke; to pierce a whale with a harpoon; to innoculate		PE kap0-				kape-	kxpe-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1087 \u1099 -\
kaapegragh- 	r6gsuhf4-	tap on something															to tap on something		< kaape-?-ragh-				kapegragh- 	kxpegragh- 	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kaapelqaq	r6gsk]2f2	dish made with chopped frozen greens, shortening, and sugar															dish made with chopped frozen greens, shortening, and sugar		< kaape-?-				kapelqaq	kxpelqaq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
kaapenta	r6gsynf	carpenter		Ighneqenghitaguu 
\f2\i kaapentam
\f0\i0 ? \'91Isn\'92t this the 
\f2\i carpenter\'92s
\f0\i0  son?\'92 (Matthew 13:55)													carpenter		from English \'91carpenter\'92	SLI			kapenta	kxpenta	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \
kaapqaghte-	r6g2f5ns-	jab		sikukun kaapqaghtunga \'91I jabbed myself with a needle\'92													to jab		kaape-qaghte-		VK\'92s notes		kapqaghte-	kxpqaghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1087 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kaapute-	r6gens-	poke something			bump (of fish)	go into sea swell (of boat)											to poke something; to bump (of fish); to go into sea swell (of boat)		< kaape-(u)te-				kapute-	kxpute-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kaaputfik	r6genabr	electric outlet (or similar thing)			outlet, electric (or similar thing)												electric outlet		< kaapute-vik				kaputfik	kxputfik	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \
kaapuvike-	r6gedbrs-	sew on		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 fasten	pin								stitch on			to sew, or stitch on; to fasten or pin	ghbibdfnm. ghbcntubdfnm. ghbrfksdfnm. ghbvtnsdfnm	< kaape-?-vike-		Rub. 202		kapuvike-	kxpuvike-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
kaasilghaq	r6cbk4f2	mortar		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kaasitaq; 
\f2\i used for pounding blubber and other foods													
\f0\i0 mortar		< ?-lghaq				kasilghaq	kxsilghaq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kaasitaq	r6cbnf2	pestle		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kaasilghaq; 
\f2\i used for pounding blubber and other foods													
\f0\i0 pestle		< ?-(u)taq		CK A & W 33		kasitaq	kxsitaq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b kaaslaampa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub r6ck]6vgf\super s	\nosupersub gas lamp or lantern		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  kaaslaampek,
\f2\i  for one such device	
\f0\i0 lantern (gas ~)	lamp (gas ~)											gas lamp		from English \'91gas-lamp\'92	SLI			kaslampae	kxslxmpae	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1084 \u1087 \u1072 \u1099 \
kaate-	r6ns-	arrive		kaatuq \'91he arrived\'92; kaataa \'91he arrived at it, reached it, got to it, caught up with him\'92 / Entaqun unuk ataasiq atughluku, aallghani whanikumaan 
\f2\i kaatuq
\f0\i0  neminun. \'91Probably taking the whole night (to travel) she 
\f2\i arrived at
\f0\i0  her house soon the next day.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:214); Mangteghat aliighluki 
\f2\i kaatii, kaalluni
\f0\i0  mangteghamun qineghsalghiimi aghnaq qama qepghaghaqeftuq nateghmi. \'91She 
\f2\i went over to
\f0\i0  the house after she had first noticed it, and 
\f2\i reaching
\f0\i0  the house she looked and saw a woman working on the floor.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:206); anengaghmi angtalanga kaataa \'91he has caught up with his older brother in height now\'92; kaatutaa \'91he arrived with it\'92	reach or get to	catch up with								overtake			to arrive; to reach or get to; to catch up with; to overtake		< kate-				kate-	kxte-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kaatqaghtamalghii	r6n2f5nfvfk47	hot-tempered person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91one who arrives quickly\'92, 
\f2\i meaning here,
\f0\i0   \'91is quick to anger\'92	irascible person								check				hot-tempered, irascible person	dcgskmxbdsq	< kaate-qaghte-?-ma-lghii		Rub. 206		katqaghtamalghi	kxtqaghtamalghx	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1090 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
kaave-	r6ds-	topple		kaavuq \'91it tumbled down\'92 / kaavestaa \'91he made it tumble down\'92; kaavelleq \'91crushed stone resulting from landslide or collapse\'92; Naayghaq 
\f2\i kaavumalghii
\f0\i0  ighivgaq. \'91The mountain 
\f2\i had a rockslide
\f0\i0  last night.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 71)	tumble down	rockslide (have a ~)								landslide (have a ~)			to topple; to collapse; to tumble down; to fall down; for there to be a rockslide or landslide						kave-	kxve-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1074 \u1099 -\
kaavlak	r6dkzr	bearberry			
\f2\i Arctostaphylos sp.												
\f0\i0 bearberry (Arctostaphylos sp.)		PE kavla!				kavlak	kxvlak	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1074 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \
kaaw-	r61-	hit, especially with something other than the hand		kaawhtuq \'91he hit himself, it struck\'92; kaawaa \'91he hit it\'92 / kaagutaa \'91he hit it against something\'92; kaagutuq \'91he bumped into something\'92; kaagtughaa \'91he is hitting it (as with a hammer)\'92													to hit, especially with something other than the hand		PE ka9u!-				kaw-	kxw-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1265 -\

\f1\b kaawa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub r61f\super s	\nosupersub cow		kaawet \'91cows\'92; Enkaam kiyaghnengllaqat 
\f2\i kaawaghaghsugnilngughmeng
\f0\i0 , aghqerraaqaatlu. \'91Then they created an idol in the form of a 
\f2\i calf
\f0\i0  and offered sacrifices to it.\'92 (Acts 7.41); = kaakw
\f2\i  (the form found more on the Chukotkan side)													
\f0\i0 cow		from English \'91cow\'92	SLI			kawae	kxwae	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1265 \u1072 \u1099 \
kaawasaki	r61fcfrb	boat (old type of motorized ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 Kawasaki brand or type motorized vehicle												old type of motorized boat; Kawasaki brand or type motorized vehicle	rfnth cnfhjuj j,hfpwf	from Japanese brand name \'91Kawasaki\'92		CK V & E 107		kawasaki	kxwasaki	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1265 \u1072 \u1089 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \
kaawhtaan	r61]n6y	club (for striking or hitting)															club (for striking or hitting)		< kaaw-tagh\super 2\nosupersub -(u)n				kawhtan	kxwhtxn	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1265 \u1100 \u1090 \u257 \u1085 \
kaawngkagh-	r613rf4-	jump		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 leap												to jump; to leap		< kaaw-?-		CK Rub 207		kawngkagh-	kxwngkagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1265 \u1187 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kaawraneq	r61hfys2	ice (small chunk of ~ remaining when sea has become mostly ice-free, resulting from crushing or shattering in late spring)		
\f2\i see item 22 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	brash ice, sparse	sea ice type							also listed as kaawrineq - ?				small chunk of ice remaining when sea has become mostly ice-free, resulting from crushing or shattering in late spring; brash ice (?)				CK Oozeva 21 		kawraneq	kxwraneq	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1265 \u1088 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
kaay, kay	r6q. rfq	oh dear!		
\f2\i particle; sometimes pronounced with vowel as in English 
\f0\i0 \'91pay\'92; kay, angyaput tagillequt neqngunaamta talwa \'91oh dear, our boat will come and we don't even have any food ready\'92; kay, seghleghhalek legan whaa tengegkayuget aviinnaqut aqfaaghinaqet tuquyulghiimeng esla seghleghughtekanga \'91oh dear, it seems that the plane that was going to come for the deathly ill person cannot come due to the horrible weather\'92; Maalghuk ighuk ugugnaghaam ighukek neghumakek. Taagken aghnam pimakanga, aqsanga kenegraamaan, "
\f2\i Kaay
\f0\i0  aqsan aafkaghllequq." \'91He ate two legs of the shrew. Then the woman said to him, while poking his stomach, \'93
\f2\i Oh dear
\f0\i0 , your stomach will burst.\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGH. 80); Taagken taaqsata, 
\f2\i kaay
\f0\i0  aghnaghaat qamaken anglinghhaghllugllaget aanleghaasalghiimeng, blue-meng (sunqaghyukegtameng) keniilluteng, qateghrakegtameng blouse-luteng (ggatelluteng). \'91Then when they were finished, 
\f2\i boy oh boy,
\f0\i0  teenage girls from inside came out, wearing blue dresses with white blouses.\'92 (PANGEGH. 35)	boy oh boy												oh dear!; boy oh boy						kay, kay	kxy, kay	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1253 , \u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \
kaaykaavrak	r6qr6dhfr	crab (hermit ~)		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; questioned	
\f0\i0 hermit crab	
\f2\i Pagurua ochotensis 
\f0\i0 or
\f2\i tenuimanus							
\f0\i0 yk is an unlikely sequence	
\f2\i Eslassochirus cavimanus			
\f0\i0 hermit crab 
\f2\i (Pagurua ochotensis, Elassochirus tenuimanus,
\f0\i0  or 
\f2\i Eslassochirus cavimanus)						
\f0\i0 kaykavrak	kxykxvrak	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1253 \u1082 \u257 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
kafsagtagh-	rfacz[nf4-	make shuffling, crinkling or rustling sound (s)		kafsagtaghtuq \'91he made rustling sounds\'92 or \'91there is a rustling sound\'92; kafsagtaghaa \'91he's making the rustling sound of it\'92 /													to make shuffling, crinkling or rustling sound (s)		< kafsak-tagh\super \'a3\nosupersub -				kafsagtagh-	kafsagtagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kafsak	rfaczr	shuffling sound		kafsekengaq \'91a quiet rustling sound\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  kaftekrak; = kapsak	crinkling sound	rustling sound								sound (shuffling, crinkling, rustling)			shuffling sound; crinkling sound; rustling sound		PY-S kavcak or kavtak				kafsak	kafsak	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
kaftekrak	rfansrifr	hail		kaftekragughtaa \'91it has begun hailing\'92													hail		PY-S kavcak or kavtak				kaftekrak	kaftekrak	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
kaga-	rfuf-	unruly		kagaaq \'91it is disordered\'92 / kagastaa \'91he made it disordered\'92	disordered	disheveled											to be unruly; to be disordered; to be disheveled (of hair or the like)		PE ka!a-				kaga-	kaga-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 -\
kagagniigh-	rfufuy74-	breathe (try to ~)			catch one\'92s breath (try to ~)												to try to breathe; to try to catch one\'92s breath				VK\'92s notes		kagagnigh-	kagagnixgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
kagak	rfufr	hollow sound such as that made by whales blowing		kagaguutuq \'91it made a hollow sound\'92													hollow sound such as that made by whales blowing						kagak	kagak	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \
kagalaqe-	rfufkf2s-	cut and divide up meat from a catch so that it is ready to be put on sleds		maklaget takuyaqmegteki kagalaqumakangat \'91when they went to the bearded seals, they cut and divided them up\'92; kagalaqluku maklagtaghteng utaqiit ilateng \'91they cut the bearded seal they\'92d caught and waited for their companions\'92													to cut and divide up meat from a catch so that it is ready to be put on sleds				CK A & W 33 		kagalaqe-	kagalaqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kagaqe-	rfuf2s-	remove gum material from baleen		kagaqaa \'91he removed gum material from it\'92 / kagaqikuma suughqameng aqfallghaasi \'91when I take off some gum material from baleen, come get some\'92; suqat kagaqnaluki piiqanka \'91I am planning to take the gum off of the baleen\'92	gum (remove ~ material from baleen)	baleen (remove gum material from ~)											to remove gum material from baleen				CK A & W 33		kagaqe-	kagaqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kagaragh-	rfufhf4-	catch or touch something or someone with the horns		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)	
\f0\i0 butt								check exact meaning; kaga- is \'91to be unruly, disheveled\'92 and note kagayagute- \'91to get excited and run about\'92				to catch or touch something or someone with the horns; to butt	pfltdfnm. pfwtgkznm hjufvb rjuj. xnj-kb,j.			Rub. 189; CK V & E		kagaragh-	kagaragh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kagasigh-	rfufcb4-	check a crab-line		kagasightuq \'91he checked crab-line\'92; kagasighaa \'91he checked it\'92 /	crab-line (check a ~)												to check a crab-line						kagasigh-	kagasigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kagaygute-	rfufquens-	excitedly run about		yuuk kagaygutuq \'91the people excitedly ran about\'92													to excitedly run about						kagaygute-	kagaygute-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kagerghu	rfush4e	crust, hard on snow		
\f2\i Chukotkan									
\f0\i0 check if used on SLI				hard crust on snow		from Chukchi kewir\'920l, pl. kewir\'920lti \'91dry snow that is frozen through\'92	14			kagerghu	kagerghu	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1088 \u1271 \u1091 \
kaghyagh-	rf4mz4-	brag about		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 brag about	[dfcnfncz			CK V & E 144		kaghyagh-	kaghyagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
kagime-	rfubvs-	crumble		kagimuq \'91it crumbled\'92 / kagimtaa \'91he crumbled it\'92; kagimqughtuq \'91he kept on crumbling something(s) up\'92; kagimqughaa \'91he kept on crumbling it up\'92													to crumble		PY-S ka!im0-				kagime-	kagime-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1084 \u1099 -\
kagimkaq	rfubvrf2	crumbled thing			sugar												something that has been crumbled; sugar		< kagime-(g)kaq				kagimkaq	kagimkaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
kagimleghwaaq	rfubvks4162	ice (crushed ~ in shore lead which is hard for boat to pass through)		
\f2\i see item 23 in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	brash ice, dense, in shore lead	sea ice type											crushed ice in shore lead which is hard for boat to pass through; dense brash ice in shore lead		< kagimleq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				kagimleghwaq	kagimleghwxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
kagimleq	rfubvks2	ice (crushed ~ in shore lead which is hard for boat to pass through)		
\f2\i see item 23 in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	brash ice, dense, in shore lead	sea ice type											crushed ice in shore lead which is hard for boat to pass through; dense brash ice in shore lead		< kagime-?-				kagimleq	kagimleq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
kagimquusiq	rfubv28cb2	crushing device															crushing device		< kagime-qugh-(u)siq				kagimqusiq	kagimqxsiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1084 \u1179 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
Kagkasaleq	Rf[rfczks2	Kaghkusalik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kaghkusalik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Kagkasaleq	Kagkasaleq	\uc0\u1050 \u1072 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
kagpag-	rf[gfu-	pack		kagpagtuq \'91he packed\'92; kagpagaa \'91he's packed it into something\'92 / Tengegkayuget taginingatki 
\f2\i kagpagmun
\f0\i0  waamegkaagunga. \'91When they said that the airplane was coming, I hurried with my 
\f2\i packing
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 175); Nunami whani 
\f2\i kagpagpenasi
\f0\i0  aklungimeng \'85. \'91Do not 
\f2\i store up
\f0\i0  for yourselves treasures on earth \'85.\'92 (Matthew 6.19)	store away something												to pack; to store away somnething						kagpag-	kagpag-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
kagpes-	rf[gsc-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kapesqwaaq, kapestaaghhaq, kapesug-																			kagpes-	kagpes-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 -\
kagpesqwaaq	rf[gsc2162	small opening			narrow riffle bore												very small opening; narrow bore rifle		< kagpe-?				kagpesqwaq	kagpesqwxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
kagpestaaghhaq*, kagpestaaq	rf[gscn65f2. rf[gscn62	narrow opening or other such thing		kagpestaaghhaaguq \'91it is narrow\'92; Iteghtek 
\f2\i kagpestaaghhaghqun
\f0\i0  amigkun. Amik hell-mun ayuqelghii nuqtuuq, tuumkegtuqlu enkaam uglaq taakwagun igleghtaquq. \'91Enter through the 
\f2\i narrow
\f0\i0  gate. The gate to Hell is wide, a comfortable path, and many go that way.\'92 (Matthew 7.13)													narrow opening or other such thing	ntcysq. eprbq	< kagpe-staaghhaq, kagpe-staaq		CK V & E (russ voc)		kagpestaghhaq*, kagpestaq	kagpestxghhaq*, kagpestxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 , \u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
kagpesug-	rf[gsc/u-	claustrophobic (feel ~)		kagpesugtuq \'91he feels claustrophobic\'92	closed in (feel ~ upon)	breathless (feel ~)								feel claustrophobic			to feel claustrophobic; to feel closed in upon; to feel breathless		PE kape!cu!-; < kape-?-				kagpesug-	kagpesug-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
kagsagmig-	rf[czuvbu-	whip repeatedly															to whip repeatedly		< kapsagte-?-				kagsagmig-	kagsagmig-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
kagsagte-	rf[cz[ns-	whip		kagsagtaa \'91he whipped it\'92 / = kaksagte-													to whip		PY-S kakya!-				kagsagte-	kagsagte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kagsagun	rf[czuey	whip															whip		< kagsagte-(u)n				kagsagun	kagsagun	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
kagtagh-	rf[nf4-	concealed		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  kagtaghtuq \'91he put himself into seclusion\'92; kagtaghtaa \'91he concealed it\'92; kagtaghngaaq \'91it is concealed\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is in seclusion\'92	secluded												concealed; secluded						kagtagh-	kagtagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kagtaghtaghwaagh-	rf[nf5nf4164-	concealed (keep ~)															to keep concealed		< kagtagh-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -				kagtaghtaghwagh-	kagtaghtaghwxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
kagu-	rfue-	reach in		kaguuq \'91he reached in\'92; kawaa \'91he reached into it\'92 / Enkaam taakum kelliin meghanun 
\f2\i kagukaq
\f0\i0 . Meghem saamken teghhaneng nunameng tugulluni sivuqaa. \'91So he 
\f2\i reached into
\f0\i0  the waters and scooped up a handful of soil bottom of the sea.\'92 (KALLAG. 2)													to reach in		PE ka!u-				kagu-	kagu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 -\
kaguugh-	rfu84-	reach in and keep one\'92s hand(s) in (as to feel around for something)		kaguughtuq \'91he reached in and kept his hands there\'92; kaguughaa \'91he reached into it and kept his hands there\'92 /													to reach in and keep one\'92s hand(s) in (as to feel around for something)		< kagu-ugh-				kagugh-	kagxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1263 \u1271 -\
kaguuragh-	rfu8hf4-	explore by reaching in			feel around inside												to explore by reaching in; to feel around inside		< kaguugh-ragh-				kaguragh-	kagxragh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1263 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kakaa	rfr6	listen!		
\f2\i exclamatory particle													
\f0\i0 listen!		PY kaa(kaa)				kaka	kakx	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u257 \
kakafketaq	rfrfarsnf2	panics (one who ~ easily)															one who panics easily		< kakave-ketagh-				kakafketaq	kakafketaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1092 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kakaq	rfrf2	underpants, woman\'92s		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 kakak,
\f2\i  for one pair of underpants; also slang for 
\f0\i0 vagina	panties, fancy												woman's underpants; fancy panties						kakaq	kakaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
kakavaatagh-	rfrfd6nf4-	panicky (be extremely ~)															to be extremely panicky		< kakave-?-				kakavatagh-	kakavxtagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kakave-	rfrfds-	panic		kakavuq \'91he panicked\'92 / kakaftaa \'91he caused her to panic\'92; kakavutkaa \'91he panicked on account of it\'92													to panic		PY-S kakav0-				kakave-	kakave-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1099 -\
kakeg-	rfrsu-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kakeglluk, kakeghqe-															PE kakki!				kakeg-	kakeg-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1075 -\
kakeggmillaghqe-	rfrs[v]bk]z52s-	nosebleed (make one\'92s nose bleed)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to make one\'92s nose bleed	hfp,bdfnm ct,t yjc	< kakegte-?-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -		Rub. 194		kakeggmillaghqe-	kakeggmillaghqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kakeghqe-	rfrs52s-	bloody nose (have a ~)			nosebleed (have a ~)												to have a bloody nose; to have a nosebleed		PY kak0!t0- (under PE kakki!); < kakeg-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				kakeghqe-	kakeghqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kakeglliigh-	rfrs[k]74-	runny nose (have a ~)		kakeglliightuq \'91he has a snotty nose\'92 /	snotty nose (have a ~)	nose (have runny or snotty ~)											to have a runny or snotty nose		< kakeglluk-liigh-				kakeglligh-	kakegllxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
kakegllugigh-	rfrs[k]/ub4-	blow one's nose		kakegllugightuq \'91he wiped his (own) nose\'92; kakegllugighaa \'91he wiped his (another's) nose\'92 /	wipe one's nose	nose (blow or wipe one\'92s ~)											to wipe or blow one's nose		< kakeglluk-(ng)igh-				kakegllugigh-	kakegllugigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kakegllugiitaq	rfrs[k]/u7nf2	handkerchief			tissue (facial ~)												handkerchief; tissue		< kakegllugigh-(u)taq				kakegllugitaq	kakegllugxtaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kakegllugtu-	rfrs[k]/[ne-	congested nose (have a ~)		kakegllugtuuq \'91he has a stuffed nose\'92 /	nose (have a ~ nose)												to have a congested nose		< kakeglluk-tu-				kakegllugtu-	kakegllugtu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 -\
kakeglluk	rfrs[k]/r	mucus, runny			snot												runny mucus; snot		+ PY kak0!@uk \'91runnymucus\'92 (cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik kak0x@uk \'91runny mucus\'92); < kakeg-ghlluk				kakeglluk	kakeglluk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
kakegsuk	rfrs[c/r	tip of something		qateghyiighaq napaqam kakegsugaakun nalugtuq \'91a small bird landed on the top tip of a pole\'92; kakegsugmi qakma yuuk qineghpeghwaaghaquq \'91the man on top of the house is looking around diligently (as with binoculars)\'92													the tip of something				CK A & W 34		kakegsuk	kakegsuk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
kakegte-	rfrs[ns-	bloody nose (have a ~)			nosebleed (have a ~)												to have a bloody nose; to have a nosebleed		PY kak0!t0- (under PE kakki!); < kakeg-te\super 1\nosupersub -				kakegte-	kakegte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kakek	rfrsr	apex or uppermost part where roof poles meet and are lashed together in the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kaagkaq													apex or uppermost part where roof poles meet and are lashed together in the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)						kakek	kakek	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1082 \
kakelighte-	rfrskb5ns-	cold (have a ~)															to have a cold	ghjcne;ty	< kakeg-?-		CK V & E 66		kakelighte-	kakelighte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kaki	rfrb	cloth, heavy		Aghnam ighneni 
\f2\i kakigneng
\f0\i0  qiipaghiighaa. \'91The woman made a cover parka of 
\f2\i heavy cloth
\f0\i0  for her son.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 72)													heavy cloth		from English \'91kaki\'92				kaki	kaki	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \
kaki-	rfrb-	sew		kakiiq \'91he sewed\'92; kakii \'91he sewed it\'92 / Mekestaaghhaalunga liitunga kakimeng. \'91When I was small I learned sewing.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)													to sew		PE kaki-				kaki-	kaki-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 -\
kakiigh-	rfr74-	sew (keep on ~ing)															to keep on sewing		< kaki-ugh-				kakigh-	kakxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1251 \u1271 -\
kakiiq	rfr72	fish spear			fork	spear (fish ~)											fish spear; fork		PE kaki(C)a3 (under PE kaki-); < kaki-?				kakiq	kakxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1251 \u1179 \
kakiqraasiq	rfrb2i6cb2	awl											sounds reasonable				awl	ibkj	< kaki-qragh-(u)siq		Rub. 193		kakiqrasiq	kakiqrxsiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1179 \u1096 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kakivike-	rfrbdbrs-	sew something onto (it)		kakivikaa \'91he sewed something onto it, fastened a charm onto him\'92 /	fasten a charm onto (him)												to sew something onto (it); to fasten a charm onto (him)		< kaki-vik-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				kakivike-	kakivike-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
kaksaate-	rfrc9ns-	throw something (belt, rope, etc.) over someone		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0  =kagsaate	whip								check; doesn\'92t mesh well with the te of kaksagte- \'91to whip\'92, but seems otherwise connected				to throw something (belt, rope, etc.) over someone; to whip	gthtrblsdfnm xnj-k> xthtp rjuj-k> \'f8lkbyyst ghtlvtns\'b0 htvyb. dthtdrb b n>g>	< kaksagte-?		Rub. 194		kaksate-	kaksxte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kaksagte-	rfrcz[ns-	whip		kaksagtaa \'91he whipped it\'92 / = kagsagte-													to whip		PY-S kakya!-				kaksagte-	kaksagte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kakuuy, kakguuy	rfr8q. rfr[8q	oh my!		
\f2\i exclamatory particle; expresses surprise, fear, wonder or dismay at what one has experienced;
\f0\i0  = kuy													oh my!						kakuy, kakguy	kakxy, kakgxy	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1263 \u1253 , \u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \u1093 \u1263 \u1253 \
kalanta	rfkzynf	calendar															calendar		from English \'91calendar\'92	SLI			kalanta	kalanta	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \
kalefkaghte-	rfksarf5ns-	sink suddenly		kalefkaghtuq \'91it suddenly sank\'92/													to sink suddenly		< kaleve-?-				kalefkaghte-	kalefkaghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kaleftaq	rfksanf2	small plain (running?) stitch															small plain (running?) stitch				CK Nagai; see SLI Cur. Res. Man. 85		kaleftaq	kaleftaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b kalera\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rfkshf\super s	\nosupersub color															color		from English \'91color\'92	SLI			kalerae	kalerae	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1099 \
kaleru-	rfkshe-	brag about one\'92s possessions		aghnam aqelqani kalerusimakanga saghyamineng \'91the women bragged to her guest about her possessions\'92													to brag about one\'92s possessions				CK A & W 34 CK 		kaleru-	kaleru-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 -\
kaleve-	rfksds-	sink into water, mud, snow, etc.		kalevuq \'91it sank\'92 / kaleftaa \'91he made it sink\'92	drown												to sink into water, mud, snow, etc.; to drown						kaleve-	kaleve-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
kalevnaq, kalefkagnaq	rfksdyf2. rfksarfuyf2	snow into which sled runners can sink while traveling															snow into which sled runners can sink while traveling		< kaleve-naq, kaleve-?-naq				kalevnaq, kalefkagnaq	kalevnaq, kalefkagnaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 , \u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
kalilae	rfkbkzs	dalmation dog			dog, dalmation												dalmation dog		from Chukchi kelil\'920n \'91variegated, variegated seal\'92	14			kalilae	kalilae	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
kallagneq	rfk]zuys2	drum-beat		kallagneghet \'91drum-beats\'92	rhythm												drum-beat; rhythm		< kallagte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub kallagneq	kallagneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
kallagte-	rfk]z[ns-	drum (and sing)		kallagtuq \'91he beat the drum\'92 /	beat the drum												to drum (and sing); to beat the drum		PY-S ka@a!-				kallagte-	kallagte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kalleghta	rfk]s5nf	ball game		
\f2\i called
\f0\i0  aaghqutaq 
\f2\i by Chukotkans and by some St. Lawrence Islanders													
\f0\i0 a certain ball game						kalleghta	kalleghta	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
kallite-	rfk]bns-	thundering (be ~)															to be thundering		< kallug-?-				kallite-	kallite-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kallngugh-	rfk]3e4-	assembled		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  kallngughtut \'91they gathered\'92; kallngughtii \'91he gathered them\'92; kallngughngaat \'91they are gathered\'92; kallngughtiiq \'91he gathered people or things together\'92	gatthered												assembled; gathered		PE kat&u3- and katu3- (under PE kat0-)				kallngugh-	kallngugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kallugughte-	rfk]/ue5ns-	thunder (start to ~)		kallugughtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kallugughtaa \'91it\'92s starting to thunder\'92 /													for there to start to be thunder		< kalluk-ughte-				kallugughte-	kallugughte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kalluk	rfk]/r	thunder		
\f2\i also dual, 
\f0\i0 kallugek
\f2\i , for a single clap or peal of thunder
\f0\i0 ; kallugek nagaqughagka \'91I heard the thunder clap\'92; alinguq kallugegneng \'91he is afraid of thunder\'92													thunder		PE katlu!				kalluk	kalluk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
kalngagaq	rfk3fuf2	bag (storage ~)			sack, burlap	gunny sack											storage bag; burlap sack; gunny sack		< kalngak\super 1\nosupersub -ghaq				kalngagaq	kalngagaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
kalngagmig-	rfk3fuvbu-	put into a sealskin bag		kalngagmigaa \'91he put it into a bag\'92													to put into a sealskin bag		< kalngag\super 1\nosupersub -mig-				kalngagmig-	kalngagmig-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
kalngagtaq	rfk3f[nf2	backpack		traditional or modern													backpack		< kalngak\super 1\nosupersub -te\super ?\nosupersub -aq		VK\'92s notes		kalngagtaq	kalngagtaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b kalngak\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rfk3fr\'a1	sealskin bag		
\f2\i the skin is cut around the seal's neck and removed that way and then the flippers are cut off and the various holes sewn up and a new opening is made and reinforced across the upper front	
\f0\i0 bag (sealskin ~)												sealskin bag		PY kal&ak or kal&aq				kalngak1	kalngak1	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 1\

\f1\b kalngak\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rfk3fr\'99	shark		
\f2\i perhaps the same as 
\f0\i0 kalngak\super 1\nosupersub  \'91sealskin sack\'92 
\f2\i due to similarity in appearance with the shark's mouth resembling the sealskin bag's opening													
\f0\i0 shark						kalngak2	kalngak2	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 2\
kalngapegaq	rfk3fgsuf2	cloth bag		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 bag (cloth ~)												cloth bag	vtijr bp nrfyb	< kalngak\super 1\nosupersub -?		Rub. 195		kalngapegaq	kalngapegaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
kalugllaka	rfk/[k]zrf	big (oh, how big!)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 oh, how big!						kalugllaka	kalugllaka	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1072 \
kaluka	rfk/rf	knife, large, for butchering whales		= kanuka	whale-butchering knife, large												large knife used for butchering whales						kaluka	kaluka	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \
kamagragh-	rfvfuhf4-	butt															to butt		from Chukchi kama!rak \'91move, wallow, kick, tear oneself away\'92	14			kamagragh-	kamagragh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kamagraq	rfvfuhf2	elephant		
\f2\i this noun form, with its very specific meaning, is a direct nominalization of the verb form which has the more general meaning \'91to butt\'92; the elephant is known only through contact with outsiders													
\f0\i0 elephant			04			kamagraq	kamagraq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
kamagriitaq	rfvfuh7nf2	whip used to drive a reindeer herd		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 whip used to drive a reindeer herd				CK Rub 196		kamagritaq	kamagrxtaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kamagrin	rfvfuhby	mammoth		= kamagrita, 
\f2\i Chukotkan; cf. 
\f0\i0 kamagraq	tusk, buried, of mammoth or mastodon	mastodon							check if used on SLI				mammoth; mastodon; buried tusk of mammoth or mastodon		from Chukchi kama!r0t0n \'91mammoth tooth\'92	14			kamagrin	kamagrin	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1080 \u1085 \
kamagrita	rfvfuhbnf	mammoth		= kamagrin, 
\f2\i Chukotkan; cf. 
\f0\i0 kamagraq	tusk, buried, of mammoth or mastodon	mastodon							check if used on SLI				mammoth; mastodon; buried tusk of mammoth or mastodon		from Chukchi kama!r0t0n \'91mammoth tooth\'92	14			kamagrita	kamagrita	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \
kameg-	rfvsu-	skin-boots (put on ~)		kamegtuq \'91he put on boots\'92; kaamgaa \'91he put boots on her \'91/ 	put on skin-boots												to put on skin-boots		PE kam0!				kameg-	kameg-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1075 -\
kamegragh-	rfvsuhf4-	drive reindeer with a sharp  stick		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V & E)													
\f0\i0 to drive reindeer with a sharp stick	gjujyznm jktytq [jhttv			CK V & E 184		kamegragh-	kamegragh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kamegtaaq	rfvs[n62	ceremonial object of bone shaped like tip of whale fluke		
\f2\i blackened with whale eye fluid, attached to a rope on a pole (
\f0\i0 aghvegheqetaq
\f2\i ), swung to the four corners of the house when a whale is caught. cf. 
\f0\i0 kamek													ceremonial object of bone shaped like tip of whale fluke						kamegtaq	kamegtxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
kamek	rfvsr	skin-boot		kaamga \'91his boot\'92; kamegkek (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kaamgek) \'91his boots\sub 2\nosupersub \'92; kaamka \'91my boot\'92; kaamgegka \'91my boots\sub 2\nosupersub \'92; kaamgightuq \'91he took off his boots\'92													skin-boot		PE kam0!				kamek	kamek	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \
kamekruk	rfvsrier	winkle			whelk												winkle; whelk		< kamek-?-				kamekruk	kamekruk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1082 \
kamepik	rfvsgbr	boot (woman's knee-high winter ~ with bleached sealskin top)															woman's knee-high winter boot with bleached sealskin top		< kamek-pik				kamepik	kamepik	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
kameraaq	rfvsh62	boot, rubber		kameraaghqek \'91his shoes or rubber boots\sub 2\nosupersub \'92; kameraaghegka \'91my shoes rubber boots\sub 2\nosupersub \'92	rubber boot	shoe											rubber boot; shoe		< kamek-raaq				kameraq	kamerxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
kamgusluk	rfvueck]/r	person who runs errands		Ayumiq nukalpigat kamguslukaqiit kiyang \'91long ago, they usually used the young men for running errands\'92; anglinaqnguluni kamguslugukaaftuq \'91when he was growing up, he was an errand boy\'92	errand boy												person who runs errands; errand boy				CK A & W 34		kamgusluk	kamgusluk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
kamiigh-	rfv74-	boots (make ~)			make boots												to make boots		< kamek-liigh-				kamigh-	kamxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1251 \u1271 -\
kamulugaq	rfvekeuf2	worn-out skin-boot		Kaalluki piyaqminiki iimqaghneghem ilungani 
\f2\i kamulugalghun
\f0\i0  ukiqeghllakat. \'91When she got to them (she saw that) inside the depression there were 
\f2\i worn-out skin boots
\f0\i0  with holes in them.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:198)	skin-boot, worn-out												worn-out skin-boot		< kamek-?-luk-ghaq		VK\'92s notes		kamulugaq	kamulugaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1083 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
kanagalqwaaq	rfyfufk]2162	fibula															fibula		< kanagaq-?-				kanagalqwaq	kanagalqwxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
kanagaq	rfyfuf2	shin			tibia												shin; tibia		PE kana!				kanagaq	kanagaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
kanagayaaq	rfyfuf92	skin-boot, shin-high															shin-high skin-boot		< kanagaq-raaq				kanagayaq	kanagayxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
kanagh-	rfyf4-	step through soft ice or into a hole		
\f2\i may imply drowning as well													
\f0\i0 to step through soft ice or into a hole 		PE kana3-				kanagh-	kanagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kanagha-	rfyf4f-	walk with difficulty through soft snow		kanaghastaa mughayaghllagem aglaghyan ighivgaq elpesinun \'91the soft deep snow made him wade and struggle through on his way to your house yesterday\'92													to walk with difficulty through soft snow		< kanagh-?-				kanagha-	kanagha-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 -\
kanaghaghte-	rfyf4f5ns-	put (it) in quickly															to put (it) in quickly		< kanaghte-aghte-				kanaghaghte-	kanaghaghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kanaghite-	rfyf4bns-	sink in the ocean and be hard to pull up (of a heavy sea mammal)		kanaghitkaq ayveq pegnem sayugumakangat \'91they barely pulled up the large walrus that sank\'92; naghullegluku kalevluni kanaghisimalghii \'91they harpooned it and it sank and was hard to pull up\'92													to sink in the ocean and be hard to pull up (of a heavy sea mammal)				CK A & W 34		kanaghite-	kanaghite-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kanaghtaagh-	rfyf5n64-	keep in a container															to keep in a container		< kanaghte-?-				kanaghtagh-	kanaghtxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
kanaghtaaghvik	rfyf5n64dbr	prison		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; Siberian only?				prison	n/hmvf. vtcnj pfrk/xtybz	< kanaghtaagh-vik		Rub. 198		kanaghtaghvik	kanaghtxghvik	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
kanaghtaq	rfyf5nf2	food put into a container to ferment															food put into a container to ferment		< kanaghte-aq				kanaghtaq	kanaghtaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kanaghte-	rfyf5ns-	put into container		kanaghtaa \'91he put it in\'92 / aghnam kanaghquutqaa neqa aavguqaq qulmesiitmun \'91the woman is putting cut-up pieces of meat into the cooking pot\'92	container (put into a ~)												to put into container		PE kana3-			; > kanaghaghte-, kanaghtaagh-, kanaghtaq, kanaghutaq	kanaghte-	kanaghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kanaghutaq	rfyf4enf2	sleeping bag		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 sleeping bag		 < kanaghte-(u)taq				kanaghutaq	kanaghutaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kanakiiwhte-	rfyfr71ns-	stare downwards with the head bent down		qugayunghilngughestun taana quunpeng kanakiiwhluni \'91that person is always looking down just as if he\'92s ignoring everyone\'92; efqughyunghitem kanakiiwhluni naghughtii esghaghyukaghpenaki \'91he didn\'92t want to look at them when he was passing by because he had a grudge against them\'92	lowered (keep one\'92s eyes ~)												to stare downwards with the head bent down; to keep one\'92s eyes lowered		PE kana3-; < kanagh-?-		CK A & W 34		kanakiwhte-	kanakxwhte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1251 \u1265 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kanalighneq	rfyfkb4ys2	lower part or end															lower part or end		< kana(ni)-lighneq				kanalighneq	kanalighneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
kanavagh-	rfyfdf4-	move downwards			go out to sea	west wind blows								downwards (move ~)			to move downwards; to go out to sea; for west wind to blow		< ka(a)na-vagh-				kanavagh-	kanavagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kanavaq	rfyfdfr	west			west wind												west; west wind		< ka(a)na-vaq				kanavaq	kanavaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
kanegh-	rfys4-	frost		kaneghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kaanghaa \'91it frosted\'92 /													to frost		PE kan03				kanegh-	kanegh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 -\
Kaneghyengesi, Kaneghyengesiq	Rfys4qs3scb. Rfys4qs3scb2	December		
\f2\i possibly literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91time of small frost\'92; 
\f2\i also listed in various sources as 
\f0\i0 October-November, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  November													December		< kanegh-?-				Kaneghyengesi, Kaneghyengesiq	Kaneghyengesi, Kaneghyengesiq	\uc0\u1050 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 , \u1050 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kaneq	rfys2	frost															frost		PE kan03				kaneq	kaneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \

\f1\b kangeq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rf3s2\'a1	underhair		qawaagem melqwan kaangha aliightuq ghhiitaghyalghiimi \'91the down showed when the bird's feathers were plucked\'92	down (inner bird ~)												underhair; inner bird down						kangeq1	kangeq1	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1179 1\

\f1\b kangeq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rf3s2\'99	cause		kaangghituq taakut aghivatellghat \'91there is no cause for their quarrel\'92	heart of the matter	principle behind something											cause; heart of the matter; principle behind something		PE ka&i3 (or PE ka&03 (?))				kangeq2	kangeq2	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1179 2\
kangestiiqu-	rf3scn72e-	go to a place bringing one\'92s supplies and equipment in several trips		kangestiiqumeng pegnem kaatukut \'91we barely got there by bringing our gear and coming back and bringing more\'92													to go to a place bringing one\'92s supplies and equipment in several trips		< kangeq-?- (?)		CK A & W 35		kangestiqu-	kangestxqu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1251 \u1179 \u1091 -\
kanggha	rf34f	excitement			elation	mirth								joy			excitement; elation; mirth; joy					> kangghalugte-, kangghaluk	kanggha	kanggha	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 \
kangghalugte-	rf34fk/[ns-	feel better after an illness															to feel better after an illness		< kanggha-?-				kangghalugte-	kangghalugte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kangghaluk	rf34fk/r	elation															elation		< kanggha-?-				kangghaluk	kangghaluk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \
kangghuk	rf34er	crunching noise		ilangquq kangghutun tamaagaa \'91she made crunching noises when chewing on the ice\'92	rales (raspy scraping sounds made when lungs are full of fluid)												crunching noise; rales (raspy scraping sounds made when lungs are full of fluid)						kangghuk	kangghuk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \
kangghwaak	rf3416r	oldsquaw duck		kangghwaagniightuq \'91he hunted oldsquaw\'92; kangghwaagtuq \'91he caught oldsquaw\'92; kangghwaaliightuq \'91he cooked oldsquaw\'92; kangghwaagtughtuq \'91he ate oldsquaw\'92	
\f2\i Clangula hyemalis												
\f0\i0 oldsquaw duck
\f2\i  (Clangula hyemalis)						
\f0\i0 kangghwak	kangghwxk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1082 \
Kangighaghpak	Rf3b4f5gfr	Aghnaghak Lagoon (Aghnaghaak) (bay at inland end of ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 bay at inland end of Aghnaghak Lagoon (Aghnaghaak) on St. Lawrence Is.		< kangighaq-ghpak				Kangighaghpak	Kangighaghpak	\uc0\u1050 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
kangighaq	rf3b4f2	corner			cove	inlet											corner; cove; inlet		PE ka&i3a3 (under PE ka&i3); < kangiq-ghaq				kangighaq	kangighaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
Kangighaq	rf3b4f2	Kangeeghuk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kangeeghuk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		< kangiq-ghaq				Kangighaq	Kangighaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kangighin	rf3b4by	bight in ice		
\f2\i see item 24 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	ice-free cove in shore ice or in large ice floe												bight in ice; ice-free cove in shore ice or in large ice floe		< kangiq-?-(u)n				kangighin	kangighin	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \
kangightelleq	rf3b5nsk]s2	knot used to make loop at end of rope		= kangightilleq	bowline (knot)												knot used to make loop at end of rope; bowline		< kangiq-?-lleq				kangightelleq	kangightelleq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
kangightilleq	rf3b5nbk]s2	knot used to make loop at end of rope		= kangightelleq	bowline (knot)												knot used to make loop at end of rope; bowline		< kangiq-?-lleq				kangightilleq	kangightilleq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
Kangii	Rf37	Kangee Camp and Kangee Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Collier (Camp ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)	Camp Collier on St. Lawrence Is.											Kangee Camp or Camp Collier and Kangee Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		< kangiq-? (?)				Kangi	Kangx	\uc0\u1050 \u1072 \u1187 \u1251 \
kangii-	rf37-	take away		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 to take away from oneself	jndjlbn jn ct,z			CK V & E 160		kangi-	kangx-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1251 -\
kangin	rf3by	end of open-water cove or open lead in ice		
\f2\i see item 25 in list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	edge of open water within the ice												end of open-water cove or open lead in ice; edge of open water within the ice						kangin	kangin	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1085 \
kangiq	rf3b2	indentation on shoreline		tapghaam kangii tagivaghhu; uygunaqaqa \'91hand me the loop on the rope; I\'92ll add some more rope to it\'92	loop at end of rope												indentation on shoreline; loop at end of rope		PE ka&i3		Akiingqwaghneghet 112	> kangighaq, kangighin, kangightelleq, kangiqliq, kangisqaq, kangitek	kangiq	kangiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
kangiqliq*	rf3b2k]b2	thing at inner end			inner thing	wisdom tooth								molar			thing at inner end; wisdom tooth; molar		PE ka&illi3 and ka&iqli3; < kangiq-qliq				kangiqliq*	kangiqliq*	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
kangisqaq	rf3bc2f2	back of sled		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 sled back												back of sled		< kangiq-?-				kangisqaq	kangisqaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
kangita	rf3bnf	open water, wedge shaped, to the side of where pack ice touches shore ice		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 kangitek, 
\f2\i for one such area of water													
\f0\i0 wedge shaped open water to the side of where pack ice touches shore ice		< kangiq-?				kangita	kangita	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \
kangkasighpak	rf3rfcb5gfr	tornado			cyclone												tornado; cyclone		< kangkasiq-pak				kangkasighpak	kangkasighpak	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
kangkasiq	rf3rfcb2	whirlwind															whirlwind						kangkasiq	kangkasiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kangl-	rf3k-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > kangllaagh-, kanglluugte-, kanglu-; cf. kangsugh-																			kangl-	kangl-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 -\
kangllaagh-	rf3k]94-			
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to close in on something		< kangl-?-				kangllagh-	kangllxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
kanglluute-	rf3k]0ns-	crowd around something in large numbers		kanglluutut \'91they crowded around\'92; kanglluutaat \'91they crowded around it\'92 / 	stand around something in large numbers												to stand or crowd around something in large numbers		< kangl-?-				kangllute-	kangllxte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kanglu-, kangllu-	rf3k/-. rf3k]/-	surround		kanglaat \'91they are surrounding it\'92 / kangliigut \'91they are surrounding something\'92	crowd around												to surround; to crowd around		PY-S ka&lu-; < kangl-?-				kanglu-, kangllu-	kanglu-, kangllu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 -, \u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 -\

\f1\b kangpesa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rf3gscf	compass		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  kangpesek, 
\f2\i for one
\f0\i0  
\f2\i compass													
\f0\i0 compass		from English \'91compass\'92	SLI			kangpesae	kangpesae	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1072 \
Kangqaaq	Rf3262	Kongkok Bay and Basin on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kongkok Bay and Basin on St. Lawrence Is.						Kangqaq	Kangqxq	\uc0\u1050 \u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u257 \u1179 \
kangqwaaq	rf32162	small pieces of ice in the sea loosely clustered together		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kaangwqagh-	shuga												small pieces of ice in the sea loosely clustered together; shuga (?)						kangqwaq	kangqwxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
kangraak	rf3h6r	crunching noise		terakterek qiifqaghllutek kangraatun uyghaget sementekun kagimsimiita kangghuguuteghllallghegkenka tupagpagtesteghllagaagnenga \'91as the tractor made a squeaky sudden turn on the gravelly cement, there was a grating sound that startled me\'92	squeaky noise	grating noise								noise (crunchy, squeaky, raspy or grating ~)			crunching, squeaky, raspy, grating noise						kangrak	kangrxk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
kangsugh-	rf3c/4-	large (be too ~ to fit in an opening)		kangsughtuq \'91it is too large to fit\'92; kangsughaa \'91it is to large to fit through it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kangl-	fit (be too large to ~ in an opening)												to be too large to fit in an opening	yt dvtofncz			CK V & E 137 (Russ voc)		kangsugh-	kangsugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\
kangsumqaghte-	rf3c/v2f5ns-	stuck (get ~ trying to go through an opening)															to get stuck trying to go through an opening		< kangsugh-?-				kangsumqaghte-	kangsumqaghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1089 \u1102 \u1084 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kangsuute-	rf3c0ns-	crowd together in a small area															to crowd together in a small area		< kangsugh-(u)te-				kangsute-	kangsxte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kangulga	rf3ekuf	skua (south polar ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V & E)	Catharacta maccormicki	
\f0\i0 south polar skua							despite the name \'91south polar\'92 these birds are found in the area sometimes				south polar skua 
\f2\i (Catharacta maccormicki)	
\f0\i0 gjvjhybr. vjhcrjq hfp,jhybr	from Chukchi ka&ol!0n \'91type of gull\'92		CK V & E 59		kangulga	kangulga	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1075 \u1072 \
kangyaaqe-	rf3m92s-	see (him) off on a trip		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to see (him) off on a trip						kangyaqe-	kangyxqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kaniiyugte-	rfy7/[ns-	jealously guard one\'92s priority in a situation		kaniiyuglluni sivuliinaqutka ilani pistegpenaki \'91he tries to remain as the first with out letting others a chance\'92; kaniiyuglluni weninguq ellnga pillequq \'91he will (do it) because he has been jealously guarding his priority (in these matters)\'92									what on earth does this mean				to jealously guard one\'92s priority in a situation				CK A & W 35		kaniyugte-	kanxyugte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1251 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kanivaan	rfybd6y	diaphram (anatomical)		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 kanivaatet,
\f2\i  for one diaphram													
\f0\i0 diaphram (anatomical)		PE kaniva3un				kanivan	kanivxn	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u257 \u1085 \
kanti	rfynb	candy		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 candy		from English \'91candy\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R199, V&E94)		
\f0\i0 kanti	kanti	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1080 \
kanuk	rfyer	blood spot or streak															blood spot or streak		PE kanu!			> kanuughqe-, kanuuguute-	kanuk	kanuk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \
kanuka	rfyerf	knife, large, for butchering whales		= kaluka	whale-butchering knife, large												large knife used for butchering whales						kanuka	kanuka	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \
kanuughqe-	rfy852s-	blood (accidently get ~ on)		kanuughquq \'91he bloodied himself\'92; kanuughqaa \'91he bloodied it\'92 /	bloody												to accidently get blood on; to bloody		< kanuk-?-				kanughqe-	kanxghqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kanuuguute-	rfy8u8ns-	bleed															to bleed		< kanuk-?-				kanugute-	kanxgxte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1263 \u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kanuyaaghruk	rfye94her	shell (gun cartridge ~)															gun cartridge shell		< kanuya-?-ruk				kanuyaghruk	kanuyxghruk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \

\f1\b kanuya\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rfyez\super s	\nosupersub copper															copper		PE kannuya3				kanuyae	kanuyae	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1103 \u1099 \
kape-	rfgs-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kaape-, kapeghte-, kapeqengeltaq, kapeqlak, kapugh-															PE kap0-				kape-	kape-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 -\
kapeghte-	rfgs5ns-	pound blubber to make it render faster		kapeghtaa \'91he pounded it (blubber)\'92 / kapeghtiiq \'91he pounded some blubber\'92	pound repeatedly												to pound on something repeatedly; to pound blubber to make it render faster		< kape-?-				kapeghte-	kapeghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kapeghtisiq	rfgs5nbcb2	blubber pounder															blubber pounder		< kapeghte-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				kapeghtisiq	kapeghtisiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kapeqengeltaq	rfgs2s3sk]nf2	dotted material			paresthesia ("pins and needles" feeling in flesh)	\'93pins and needles\'94 feeling											dotted material; paresthesia ("pins and needles" feeling in flesh)		< kape-?-				kapeqengeltaq	kapeqengeltaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kapeqlak	rfgs2k]zr	dotted thing															dotted thing		< kape-?-				kapeqlak	kapeqlak	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
kapesegak	rfgscsufr	parka made from red-dyed reindeer skin worn over woman\'92s overalls															parka made from red-dyed reindeer skin worn over woman\'92s overalls		< kape-?-
\f2\i dual		
\f0\i0 CK A & W 35		kapesegak	kapesegak	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \
Kapsagfik	Rfgcz[abr	July		
\f2\i Chukotkan; said to mean
\f0\i0  \'91month when plants become fragile\'92;
\f2\i  cf. 
\f0\i0 kape-	August												July; August						Kapsagfik	Kapsagfik	\uc0\u1050 \u1072 \u1087 \u1089 \u1103 \u1093 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \
kapsagtagh-	rfgcz[nf4-	rustle		
\f2\i Chukoktan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				to rustle	iehifnm.crhtcnb	< kapsak-?-		Rub. 202		kapsagtagh-	kapsagtagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1089 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kapsak	rfhczr	crunching noise		
\f2\i in particular when dry plants are stepped on; 
\f0\i0 = kavsak	rustling sound	noise (crunching or rustling ~)											crunching noise; rustling sound						kapsak	kapsak	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1088 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
kapugh-	rfge4-	stab repeatedly			poke repeatedly	innoculate people											to stab repeatedly; to poke repeatedly; to innoculate people		PE kapu3- (under PE kap0-); < kape-ugh-				kapugh-	kapugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kaputaghaq	rfgenf4f2	short-tailed shearwater		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  kape-	shearwater, short-tailed	
\f2\i Puffinus tenuirostris											
\f0\i0 short-tailed shearwater 
\f2\i (Puffinus tenuirostris)						
\f0\i0 kaputaghaq	kaputaghaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kaputaq	rfgenf2	awl		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V & E)													
\f0\i0 awl	ibkj	PE kappun (under PE kap0-); < kape-(u)taq		CK V & E 83		kaputaq	kaputaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Karakae	Rfhfrfs	Koryak		
\f2\i American Indians are the second ethnic group to the east past Inupiaqs as Koryaks are the second ethnic group to the west past Chukchis and hence the the name for Koryaks has been extended by some to mean also American Indian (though 
\f0\i0 Iintiyaghmii
\f2\i  (q.v.) is more common)	
\f0\i0 Indian (American ~)	American Indian											Koryak; American Indian		related to Chukchi karakwarat \'91Kerek (pl.)\'92	09, 14			Karakae	Karakae	\uc0\u1050 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1099 \
kargae	rfhufs	hole in garment		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 hole in garment		from Chukchi kar!0l!0n, kar!0n, pl. kar!0t \'91hole, patch in garment\'92	14			kargae	kargae	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1088 \u1075 \u1072 \u1099 \
kasivag-	rfcbdfu-	encounter head-on unexpectedly		kasivagaa \'91he met it or her head-on\'92 / kasivagutuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kasivagiiq \'91he met something or someone head-on\'92	meet head-on unexpectedly												to encounter or meet head-on unexpectedly						kasivag-	kasivag-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 -\
kaspeneq	rfcgsys2	seam, one of eight, of the insulated
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 one of the eight seams of the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , the
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house				CK Rub 206		kaspeneq	kaspeneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
kaspigpak	rfcgb[gfr	ice (large overlapping upended and angled piece of thin ~ frozen into the sea ice surface)		
\f2\i see item 26 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	overlapping upended and angled large piece of thin ice frozen into the sea ice surface	sea ice type											large overlapping upended and angled piece of thin ice frozen into the sea ice surface		< kaspik-ghpak		CK Oozeva 25		kaspigpak	kaspigpak	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1087 \u1080 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
kaspik	rfcgbr	overlapping upended and angled piece of thin ice frozen into the sea ice surface		
\f2\i see item 27 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qaspighte-	ice (overlapping upended and angled piece of thin ~ frozen into the sea ice surface)	shingle, roofing								sea ice type			overlapping upended and angled piece of thin ice frozen into the sea ice surface; roofing shingle						kaspik	kaspik	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
kaspikengeltaq	rfcgbrs3sk]nf2	ice (small overlapping upended and angled piece of thin ~ frozen into the sea ice surface)		
\f2\i see item 28  on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	overlapping upended and angled small piece of thin ice frozen into the sea ice surface	sea ice type											small overlapping upended and angled piece of thin ice frozen into the sea ice surface		< kaspik-?-ngestaq		CK Oozeva 27		kaspikengeltaq	kaspikengeltaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kaspugte-	rfcge[ns-	pass through a specific time or place		kaspugtaa ataasiq tanqiq \'91he went through one month\'92; uzivuq kenlanga kaspugtelleghminun taana angqaperuk uzivyaghaq \'91he went around the whole circumference\'92; college-elluni kaspugtaa \'91he completed going to college\'92	go around	go through completely from beginning to end								complete (a course of action)			to pass through a specific time or place; to go around; to go through completely from beginning to end; complete (a course of action)		PY-S kaspu!t0-				kaspugte-	kaspugte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1087 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kasug-	rfc/u-	bump into something hard		kasugaa \'91he bumped it; the waves hit it\'92 / kasugiiq \'91he hit something\'92; kasugutuq \'91he bumped his head on something hard\'92	surf hits shore	waves hits boat								club (hit hard)			to bump into something hard; for surf to hit shore; for waves to hit boat; to club (hit hard)		PE katyu!-			> kasughqugh-, kasugnaq, kasugun	kasug-	kasug-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
kasughqu-	rfc/52e-	hit repeatedly (as waves on a cliff)															to repeatedly hit (as waves on a cliff)		< kasug-?-				kasughqu-	kasughqu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 -\
kasugnaq	rfc/uyf2	rough splashing water that one goes through by boat			water, rough and splashing that one goes through by boat	swells that hit the side of a boat spraying water in											rough splashing water that one goes through by boat; swells that hit the side of a boat spraying water in		< kasug-naq				kasugnaq	kasugnaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
kasugun	rfc/uey	club for hitting															club for hitting		< kasug-(u)n				kasugun	kasugun	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
katag-	rfnfu-	empty or dump a container outside		katagaa \'91he dumped it outside\'92 / katagiiq \'91he dumped something outside\'92													to empty or dump a container outside		PE kata!-			; > katagvik	katag-	katag-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 -\
katagvik	rfnfudbr	dump															dump		< katag-vik				katagvik	katagvik	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
katam	rfnfv	like (similar to)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 katam whaten \'91just like this\'92; Legan aga anengaat taakwagun nalugutqaghtaghtuq kiwavek uteghvanun. Tawaten 
\f2\i katam
\f0\i0  legan ellngallu nukalpigaq nalugutaaghtuq ighungitgun aghnaghaat. Their older brother would just dive further back towards the east. The young man too 
\f2\i just like
\f0\i0  
\f2\i that
\f0\i0  would land in between the legs of the girls. (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:4); Tuquneghmeggni mesii qugaaghqwaakayuguniluki, ilangi 
\f2\i katam
\f0\i0  juice-estun ayuqniiqanka. \'91When they ferment, their juice would become quite sour; I would say some of it was 
\f2\i just like 
\f0\i0 (orange) juice.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:90); \'85 nunami whani, 
\f2\i katam
\f0\i0  qilagmelngughestun. \'91\'85 on earth 
\f2\i as
\f0\i0  in heaven.\'92 (Matthew 6.10)	just like	like, just like							more info. needed on meaning and use				like; just like; one's own		from Chukchi ketem \'91just, just like\'92				katam	katam	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \
katamngwaaq	rfnfv362	right (something that is just ~)		kameraaghqek katamngwaaghuk \'91his rubber boots are a perfect fit\'92; Qavngaghtarugllaget sikuunka Pedersen-meng ima tukfighat, pinit taakeghllanghilnguut, taakeghpaget 
\f2\i katamngwaaghet
\f0\i0  kenukeggneghilnguut pinit. \'91These old (glover\'92s) needles that I bought from Pedersen are good, not too long, 
\f2\i just right 
\f0\i0 in length, good without (overly) sharp edges.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:94)	fit (something that ~s perfectly)												something that is just right; something that fits perfectly		< katam-?				katamngwaq	katamngwxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1187 \u257 \u1179 \
katamqun	rfnfv2ey	barely		
\f2\i particle;  
\f0\i0 katamqun taawa qayuusim imaghhaa siipsimalghii pagunghaq saghnakaq \'91there are only a cup left of the berries that were picked\'92; Maaten ilangani nunalgutangit qamaglluteng Quyillegqaasimalghiit. 
\f2\i Katamqun
\f0\i0  yaywaalingiighhaak  unegsimalghiik. \'91Then one time their fellow villagers all went off with the Chukchis. 
\f2\i Only
\f0\i0  the two little orpans remained behind.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 61)	only												barely; only		< katam=qun				katamqun	katamqun	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
kate-				
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kaate-,
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 katelghaate-, kateqneq, katengsi-															PE kat0-				kate-	kate-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
katelghaate-	rfnsk46ns-	come as a group		Upenghami allaghhiinaq qawaak 
\f2\i katelghaasagutkaq
\f0\i0 , ighnilaghasagutkaq. \'91In the spring all sorts of birds 
\f2\i came as a group
\f0\i0  and begane to have young.\'92 (KALLAG. 6)													to come as a group		< kate-?-(u)te-				katelghate-	katelghxte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
katengsi-	rfns3cb-	gather something		katengsikestaa pilleghqaghpek sivungani \'91gather your things before you leave\'92	save up something												to gather or save up something		< kate-?-		CK A & W 36		katengsi-	katengsi-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1089 \u1080 -\
kateqneq	rfns2y]s2	herd of walrus in water											check; sounds interesting    (It\'92s good-CK)				herd of walrus in water	cnflj vjh;tq	< kate-?-		Rub. 206; CK		kateqneq	kateqneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
kavenghu	rfdsy4e	fish type		
\f2\i Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined	
\f0\i0 loach (lake ~)								exact species identification needed				kind of fish called "lake loach"						kavenghu	kavenghu	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 \
Kavezruk	Rfdspher	former village on the western shore of Providenia Bay in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village on the western shore of Providenia Bay in Chukotka						Kavezruk	Kavezruk	\uc0\u1050 \u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1079 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
kavigh-	rfdb4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kavighqwaa, kavighqwaa-, kavighruk, kavighte-, kavighuute-, kavighyaak, kavighzik-, kavilleq, kavimsiiq, kaviiq, kaviqrak, kavirrakegtaq, kavisengwaaq, kavitaraak, kavite-, kavitun															PE kavi3-				kavigh-	kavigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kavighqwaa-	rfdb5216-	blush		kavighqwaaguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kavighqwaagaa \'91it turned red, he blushed\'92 /	redden												to blush; to redden		< kavigh-?-				kavighqwa-	kavighqwx-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 -\
kavighruggalek	rfdb4he[fksr	pity (oh, what a ~!)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exclamatory particle									
\f0\i0 check; from kavigh- \'91red\'92 ??? and is final suffix -ghhalek actually?				oh, what a pity!	jq rfr ;fkrj. rfrfz ;fkjcnm>	< kavigh-ruk-ghhalek		Rub. 187		kavighruggalek	kavighruggalek	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
kavighruk	rfdb4her	reddish thing															reddish thing		< kavigh-ruk				kavighruk	kavighruk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
kavighte-	rfdb5ns-	redden		kavightuq \'91it reddened\'92; kavightaa \'91he reddened it, it became red\'92 /	dye red												to redden; to dye red		< kavigh-?-				kavighte-	kavighte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kavighun	rfdb4ey	red dye			alder bark used to dye skin red												red dye; alder bark used to dye skin red		< kavighte-(u)n				kavighun	kavighun	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
kavighuute-	rfdb48ns-	red (suddenly emit ~ light)			emit red light	reddish (suddenly become ~)											to suddenly emit red light or become reddish		< kavigh-?-				kavighute-	kavighxte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kavighyaak	rfdb4m9r	ochre															ochre		< kavigh-?-				kavighyak	kavighyxk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
kavighzik	rfdb4pbr	pink color			reddish color, light												pink color; light reddish color		< kavigh-?-				kavighzik	kavighzik	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 \u1079 \u1080 \u1082 \
kaviipik	rfd7gbr	red fox			fox, red	
\f2\i Vulpes fulva											
\f0\i0 red fox 
\f2\i (Vulpes fulva)		
\f0\i0 < kaviiq-pik				kavipik	kavxpik	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
kaviiq	rfd72	fox			arctic fox	white fox								
\f2\i Alopex lagopus			
\f0\i0 fox; 
\f2\i especially
\f0\i0  arctic or white fox 
\f2\i (Alopex lagopus)		
\f0\i0 PE kav(v)i(C)a3 (under PE kavi3-); < kavigh-?-				kaviq	kavxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1179 \
kavilleq	rfdbk]s2	egg yolk		Qaqsungiim manigi qamagtevzighluteng 
\f2\i kavillghhuut
\f0\i0 . \'91The eggs of the kittiwake are almost all 
\f2\i yolk
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 94)	yolk of egg												egg yolk		< kavigh-lleq (?)				kavilleq	kavilleq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
kavilnguq*	rfdbk3e2	red thing		Taakuk qiipaghaak gaaghusikek puygunaanghilkegka. 
\f2\i Kavilnguuk
\f0\i0  piitesiighameng igalgek qatelghiimeng, sungaghyukegtameng, sungaghyaagmeng. \'91I will never forget the cover parka that she wore for cooking. It was 
\f2\i red
\f0\i0  with small flowers printed on it in white, blue and green.\'92 (SULUWET 13)	red color												red thing; the color red		< kavite-nguq				kavilnguq*	kavilnguq*	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
kavimsiiq	rfdbvc72	orange color															orange color		< kavigh-?-				kavimsiq	kavimsxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1084 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
kaviqrak	rfdb2ifr	red dot			dot, red	measles											red dot; measles		< kavigh-krak				kaviqrak	kaviqrak	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
kavirrakegtaq	rfdbifrs[nf2	red color, bright															bright red color		< kavigh-?-kegtaq				kavirrakegtaq	kavirrakegtaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kavisengwaaq	rfdbcs3162	boot (men's knee-high, fur-side in, red-colored summer ~)		
\f2\i the \'91brick\'92 meaning is Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 brick												men's knee-high, fur-side in, red-colored summer boot; brick		< kavigh-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		Rub. 188		kavisengwaq	kavisengwxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
kavitaraak	rfdbnfh6r	reddish thing or reddish dog															reddish thing; reddish dog		< kavigh-?-raak				kavitarak	kavitarxk	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
kavite-	rfdbns-	red (be ~)		kavituq \'91it is red\'92 /													to be red		< kavigh-te\super \'a3\nosupersub -				kavite-	kavite-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kavitun	rfdbney	red (being ~)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  kavitun ayuquq \'91it is red, it\'92s like it\'92s red\'92													being red		< kavigh-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 kavitun	kavitun	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
kavlek	rfdksr	clicking noise, loud		kavletun \'91like a loud clicking, clattering or knocking\'92	noise (loud clattering, banging or knocking ~)	clattering noise								knocking noise			loud clicking, clattering or knocking sound or noise						kavlek	kavlek	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
kavyug-	rfdm/u-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kavyugite-, kavyuguute-																			kavyug-	kavyug-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
kavyugite-	rfdm/ubns-	soft-spoken (be ~)		kavyugituq \'91he is soft-spoken\'92 /													to be soft-spoken		 < kavyug-(ng)ite-				kavyugite-	kavyugite-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kavyuguute-	rfdm/u8ns-	speak softly			softly (speak ~)												to speak softly		< kavyug-?-				kavyugute-	kavyugxte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kawaaq	rf162	skin of  young bearded seal		
\f2\i used for making rope	
\f0\i0 bearded seal, young, skin	seal (skin of young bearded seal)											skin of  young bearded seal		PE ka(C)u! (?)		CK Rub 206		kawaq	kawxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
kayaaghtaagh-	rf95n64-	flex the arm muscle															to flex the arm muscle		< kayaaq-?-				kayaghtagh-	kayxghtxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
kayaali-	rf9kb-	weaken		kayaaliiq \'91he got weak\'92 /	get weak												to weaken; to get weak		< kayaate-i\super 2\nosupersub -				kayali-	kayxli-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1080 -\
kayaalqe-	rf9k]2s-	beat (in competition)		kayaalqaa \'91he beat him (in a game, etc.)\'92/ kayaalqiiq \'91he beat someone\'92	conquer	outdo								win			to beat; to conquer; to outdo; to win		< kayaate-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				kayalqe-	kayxlqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kayaalqiiraaghute-	rf9k]27h64ens-	compete		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; cf. kayalqiista				to compete	cjcnzpfnmcz			Rub. 209 CK		kayalqiraghute-	kayxlqxrxghute-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kayaaq	rf92	biceps		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 biceps		PE kay(y)u(C)a3 (under PE kayu-); < kayu-?-				kayaq	kayxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
kayaate-	rf9ns-	weak (be ~)		kayaatuq \'91he is weak\'92 / 													to be weak		< kayu-ate-			kayaali-, kayaalqe-	kayate-	kayxte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kayaghqagh-	rfz52f4-	hope															to hope						kayaghqagh-	kayaghqagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kayagte-	rfz[ns-	urge		kayagtaq \'91someone sent on an errand\'92	send someone on a errand												to urge; to send someone on an errand						kayagte-	kayagte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kayalaawi-	rfqfk61b-	become weak		
\f2\i of a person;
\f0\i0  ikfiqliighlleghma entaqun kayalaawighllaguunga \'91I guess I am weakened from my struggle (sickness)\'92; naayghamun mayulghii kayalaawiiq qaygeghtegpenani \'91he was becoming weak while climbing the moutain with out even reaching the top\'92	weaken												to become weak; weaken		< kayu-?		CK A & W 36 CK		kayalawi-	kayalxwi-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1072 \u1083 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\
kayalnga-	rfqfk3f-	go somewhere without letting anyone knowing where		taghnughhaat kayalnganaqeghllaguut \'91the children are constantly going to places without letting any one know\'92; kayalngatutmineng qenwat iflangwaaghamalghii \'91he got lost because he never told anyone where he was going\'92													to go somewhere without letting anyone know where				CK A & W 36		kayalnga-	kayalnga-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 -\
kayanagh-	rfqfyf4-	out of condition (be ~)		kayanaghwaaghuuten wiin apeghiiquvek pilghaaten \'91you are not in shape, so don\'92t go until you are ready\'92													to be out of condition				CK A & W 36		kayanagh-	kayanagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kayanaq	rfzyf2	chaos											needs more explanation				chaos				VK\'92s notes		kayanaq	kayanaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
kayanqun	rfzy2ey	added (something to be ~)		Llaaghanwha legan 
\f2\i kayanqun
\f0\i0  maana ukighqughaqegkefut, akingilngughmun samun neqmun ukigtelleghput pikayugukefut, enkaam estuwaghput ifliingigalnguq. \'91We could lower the 
\f2\i profit margin
\f0\i0  (if need be); we would adjust it to the value of the food item and then the store wouldn\'92t suffer a loss.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:80)													something to be added						kayanqun	kayanqun	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
kayanqutkaghqaq	rfzy2enrf52f2	trim material			something to be added												something to be added; trim material		< kayanqun-kaghqaq				kayanqutkaghqaq	kayanqutkaghqaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
kayaqagh-	rfz2f4-	encourage		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 shout encouragement								check				to encourage; to shout encouragement	gjl,flhbdfnm rjuj-k> rhbrjv					kayaqagh-	kayaqagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1103 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kayeme-	rfqsvs-	urge		kayemaa \'91he encouraged her\'92 /	encourage	aid								help			to urge; to encourage; to aid; to help		PE kay0m0(t)-				kayeme-	kayeme-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 -\
kayemghhagh-	rfqsv5f4-	move (something) by leaning and pushing on it		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check this				to move (something) by leaning and pushing on it	gthtldbufnmcz. jgbhfzcm yf xnj-k>	< kayeme-ghhaq		Rub. 192		kayemghhagh-	kayemghhagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kayemugh-, kayemghagh-	rfqsve4-. rfqsv4f4-	encourage (keep ~ing)															to keep encouraging		< kayeme-ugh-, kayeme-?-				kayemugh-, kayemghagh-	kayemugh-, kayemghagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1091 \u1271 -, \u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kayengenghaghhaq	rfqs3sy4f5f2	sculpin															sculpin		< kaku-?-ghhaq				kayengenghaghhaq	kayengenghaghhaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
kayengestaq	rfqs3scnf2	fish (small ~ of some time)		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined									
\f0\i0 precise identification need				small fish of some type		< kayu-ngestaq				kayengestaq	kayengestaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kayepghagh-	rfqsg5f4-	scoot oneself along the ice on a small sled pushing with sticks or the like against the ice		kayepghaasit unaghsighhaat uugnangi tuquuqameng ipegsaqameng nuvulget \'91the pushing sticks are made with sharpened nails on one bottom end\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  kayeme-, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  ayapghaataq													to scoot oneself along the ice on a small sled pushing with sticks or the like against the ice		PE kay0m0(t)-		CK A & W 36		kayepghagh-	kayepghagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kayi-	rfqb-	cook (chopped seal blubber) to extract oil		kayii \'91he made oil from it\'92 /	oil (make ~ from)												to cook (chopped seal blubber) to extract oil; to make oil from						kayi-	kayi-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1080 -\
kayiipa	rfq7gf	bread, store-bought		
\f2\i Chukotkan; cf. 
\f0\i0 kayi-	cake, flat	doughnut											store-bought bread; flat cake; doughnut		
\f4 perhaps from Russian 
\f0 [kt,
\f4  (xleb) \'91bread\'92, perhaps via Chukchi qlevan, qlep,  \'91bread\'92	
\f0 14			kayipa	kayxpa	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1251 \u1087 \u1072 \
kayngaaghaq*	rfq364f2	bear cub (brown ~)			cub (brown bear ~)												brown bear cub		< kaynga-aghaq				kayngaghaq*	kayngxghaq*	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kayngae	rfq3fs	brown bear		kayngetuq \'91he caught a brown bear\'92; 
\f2\i the brown bear is found in Chukotka but only very rarely encountered on St. Lawrence Is.	
\f0\i0 Ursus arctos	bear, brown											brown bear (Ursus arctos)		from Chukchi key&0n \'91brown bear\'92	04, 14		kayngaaghaq 	kayngae	kayngae	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
kayngu-	rfq3e-	embarrassed		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  kaynguyugtuq \'91he feels embarrassed, ashamed, timid\'92; kayngunaghtuq \'91it causes shame\'92; kayngukaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kaynguyukaa \'91he feels shame over it\'92	ashamed												embarrassed; ashamed		PE kay&u-			; > kayngumiqe-, kayngungite-, kayngusaghagh-, kayngutaq	kayngu-	kayngu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 -\
kayngumiqe-	rfq3evb2s-	embarrassed (be ~)															to be embarrassed		< kayngu-miqe-				kayngumiqe-	kayngumiqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kayngungite-	rfq3e3bns-	shy (not be ~)			embarrassed or ashamed (not be ~)												to not be shy; to not be embarrassed or ashamed		< kayngu-(ng)ite-				kayngungite-	kayngungite-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kayngusaghagh-	rfq3ecz4f4-	fool (make a ~ of oneself)															to make a fool of oneself		< kayngu-saghagh-				kayngusaghagh-	kayngusaghagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kayngusleghagh-	rfq3ecks4f4-	embarrassed (become ~ by one\'92s actions but still continue them)		yiillgimaluku yuuk iteghluni kayngusleghaghluni nagneghusimakanga \'91he was gossiping about him and he walked in so he (the gossiper) was embarrassed, but he continued gossiping about him\'92													to become embarrassed by one\'92s actions but still continue them		< kayngu-?-		CK A & W 36		kayngusleghagh-	kayngusleghagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 \u1089 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kayngutaq	rfq3enf2	timid person															timid person		< kayngu-taq\super \'a2				\nosupersub kayngutaq	kayngutaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kayu	rf/	sculpin			bullhead	fish (ocean ~ especially in the sculpin family)											sculpin; bullhead; any ocean fish (especially in the sculpin family)		PY-S kayu				kayu	kayu	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \
kayu-	rf/-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kayaaq, kayaate-, kayun, kayunge-															PE kayu-				kayu-	kayu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1102 -\
kayun	rf/y	helper			aid												helper; aid		< kayu-(u)n				kayun	kayun	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1085 \
kayunge-	rf/3s-	faster (become ~)		kayunguq \'91it got faster\'92 / kayungtaa \'91it made it faster\'92; atughtet ikayughyaqmegteki leganqun kayungtiit \'91they responded to the drummers, so they drummed faster\'92; ivenruutek kayungtikek \'91accelerate the motor\'92	accelerate												to become faster; to accelerate		< kayu-nge-		CK A & W 36		kayunge-	kayunge-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1187 \u1099 -\
kayupik	rf/gbr	Pacific staghorn sculpin			sculpin (Pacific staghorn ~)	
\f2\i Leptocottus armatus											
\f0\i0 Pacific staghorn sculpin 
\f2\i (Leptocottus armatus)		
\f0\i0 < kayu-pik				kayupik	kayupik	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
kayusigh-	rf/cb4-	help		kayusighaa \'91he helped her\'92 / kayusighiiq \'91he is helping\'92													to help		< kayun-ligh-			; > kayusilleq, kayusiite-	kayusigh-	kayusigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kayusiite-	rf/c7ns-	help out		kayusiituq \'91he helped\'92; kayusiitaa \'91he helped her out\'92 /													to help out		< kayusigh-(u)te-				kayusite-	kayusxte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1089 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kayusilleq	rf/cbk]s2	grace		
\f2\i word used in Bible translation													
\f0\i0 grace		< kayusigh-lleq				kayusilleq	kayusilleq	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
kazegh-	rfps4-	go out		
\f2\i Chukotkan; questioned													
\f0\i0 to go out						kazegh-	kazegh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1099 \u1271 -\
kazifkagte-	rfpbarf[ns-	walk around something		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  yugem naayghaq kazifkagsimaa \'91the man walked around the mountain\'92													to walk around something		< kazive-?		CK Rub 191		kazifkagte-	kazifkagte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kazifte-	rfpbns-	spin		kaziftaa \'91he spun it\'92 /													to spin		< kazive-te\super 1\nosupersub -				kazifte-	kazifte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kaziva	rfpbdf	religious ceremony		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf.
\f0\i0  kazive-													religious ceremony				CK Rub 190		kaziva	kaziva	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \
kazivaalug-	rfpbd6k/u-	dizzy (get ~)		kazivaalugtuq \'91he got dizzy\'92 / kazivaalugtestaa \'91it made him dizzy\'92; kazivaalugsimaanga \'91I became dizzy\'92													to get dizzy		< kazive-?-				kazivalug-	kazivxlug-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u257 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -\
kazive-	rfpbds-	spin		kazivuq \'91it spun around\'92 / kazivutaa \'91he spun around with it\'92; kaziftaa \'91he spun it\'92	whirl	shamanistic rite (engage in a certain ~)											to spin; to whirl; to engage in a certain shamanistic rite		PE ka90v0(t)-			; > kazivaalug-, kazivun	kazive-	kazive-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 -\
kazivun	rfpbdey	strap, leather, for lashing			band, sinew, holding skin on drum frame												leather strap for lashing; sinew band holding skin on drum frame		< kazive-(u)n				kazivun	kazivun	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1085 \
kazivutkagh-	rfpbdenrf4-	anxious and confused (be ~)															to be anxious and confused		< kazive-?-				kazivutkagh-	kazivutkagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kegaraan	rsuf46y	slashes, two, made through skin in crown of head of caught walrus or bearded seal for attaching a rope		kegaraatangakun petugluku iqeghtaghput \'91after fastening a line to it (the caught sea mammal) through the slashes made in the skin of the crown of its head we tethered it to the ice\'92													slashes, two, made through skin in crown of head of caught walrus or bearded seal for attaching a rope						kegaran	kegarxn	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1085 \
kegaraasigh-	rsufh6cb4-	slash twice through the skin at the crown of the head of a caughtwalrus or bearded seal to attach a rope for pulling or hoisting		kegaraasighluku iighsughnakesi \'91slash it on the head and put a rope through it and hoist it\'92													to make slashes through the skin at the crown of the head of a caught walrus or bearded seal to attach a rope for pulling or hoisting		< kegeraan-ligh-		CK A & W 37 CK 		kegarasigh-	kegarxsigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1088 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kegarangiq	rsufhf3b2	smelt (surf smelt)		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined									exact identification ?				
\f0\i0 surf smelt				SLI Cur. Man. 53		kegarangiq	kegarangiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
keka	rsrf	ouch!		= ka, ka em; 
\f2\i exclamatory particle; 
\f0\i0 keka, aqnighqaghpenga \'91ouch, you\'92re hurting me\'92													ouch!		PE aka(a) and ak0ka				keka	keka	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \
kelag-	rskzu-	unravel		kelagtuq \'91it came undone\'92 / kelagtaa \'91he undid it\'92	undone (come ~)												to unravel; to come undone		PE k0la!-				kelag-	kelag-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 -\
keleg-	rsksu-	alert someone of an opportunity, danger, etc.		kelgaa \'91he went and told him that it was time\'92 /	warn	invite								startle and scare away (a wild animal)			to alert someone of an opportunity, danger, etc.; to tell someone that it\'92s time to act; to invite; to alert; to inform; to startle and scare away (a wild animal)		PE k0l0!-				keleg-	keleg-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
keleghvik	rsks4dbr	groove around the rim of a drum for the thong which holds on the drumskin											is there a verb kelegh- ?; where did this entry come from /				groove around the rim of a drum for the thong which holds on the drumskin						keleghvik	keleghvik	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
kelenga-	rsks3f-	wary (be ~)		kelengaaq \'91he was on guard\'92 / Teghikusat quunpeng 
\f2\i kelengaghllagulghiit
\f0\i0 . \'91Animals are always 
\f2\i on the alert
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 75)	guard (be on ~)												to be wary; to be on guard		+ PE k0l0t0- \'91be alert, wary\'92 (cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik k0@t0-, Naukan Yupik k0l0l&a-, Bering Strait Inuit kilin&a-)				kelenga-	kelenga-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 -\
kelengake-	rsks3frs-	guard		kelengakaa \'91he guarded him\'92, \'91watched over him\'92, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91watched out for him\'92 /	watch for or watch out for	babysit											to guard; to watch for or watch out for; to babysit		< kelenga-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				kelengake-	kelengake-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
kelengakista	rsks3frbcnf	guard			watchman	babysitter											guard; watchman; babysitter		< kelengake-i\super 1\nosupersub -(s)ta				kelengakista	kelengakista	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
kelengaruugh-	rsks3fh84-	watch carefully		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check -- what is the postbase here?				to watch carefully	pjhrj cktlbnm	< kelenga-?-		Rub. 228		kelengarugh-	kelengarxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1088 \u1263 \u1271 -\
kelevagh-	rsksdf4-	go back from shore or behind building		kelevaghtuq \'91he went to the back area\'92; kelevaghaa \'91he took it to the back area\'92 /	take back from shore or behind building	back (go or take ~ from shore or behind building)								go further into the house or room			to go back from shore or behind building; to take back from shore or behind building; to go further into the house or room		< kelu-vagh-				kelevagh-	kelevagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
keleve-	rsksds-	cut into a strip (when making thong from hide)		kelevuq \'91he cut hide into a thong\'92; kelevaa \'91he cut it into a thong\'92 /													to cut into a strip (when making thong from hide)		PE k0l0(t)-				keleve-	keleve-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
kelevlek	rsksdksr	ribbon seal, male		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 keleve-	
\f2\i Phoca fasciata 
\f0\i0 (ribbon seal) male	seal (male ribbon ~)											male ribbon seal 
\f2\i (Phoca fasciata)						
\f0\i0 kelevlek	kelevlek	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
kelgugh-	rskue4-	invite people			inform people												to invite people; to inform people		< keleg-gugh-				kelgugh-	kelgugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kelguneq	rskuegs2	animal that is wary (because of being shot at or the like) 		teghikusaq guuteghllagem kelgunghughsimaa \'91the animal has become wary due to being shot at a lot\'92; malighquqaat ayveq kipullgaghtaghllagughtuq kelgunghughtem \'91the walrus they were after kept on going the opposite direction because of its becoming wary\'92													animal that is wary (because of being shot at or the like)		< kelgute-neq\super 2		\nosupersub CK A & W 37		kelguneq	kelguneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \
kelgunghughte-	rskuey4e5ns-	wary (make or become ~ (of game animal))		teghikusaq guuteghllagem kelgunghughsimaa \'91the animal became wary because there was so much shooting													to make or become wary (of game animal)		< keleg-?-neq\super ?\nosupersub -(u)ghte-		VK\'92s notes		kelgunghughte-	kelgunghughte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kelgute-	rskuens-	show		kelgutaa \'91he or it showed it\'92; Qaneghmiwaaghma 
\f2\i kelgutaa
\f0\i0  puqleghama angtalanga. \'91my oral thermomether 
\f2\i showed
\f0\i0  the extent of my fever.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 137)	reveal												to show; to reveal		< keleg-(u)te-				kelgute-	kelgute-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kelig-	rskbu-	scrape		keligtuq \'91he scraped something\'92; keligaa \'91he scraped it\'92 /													to scrape		PE k0li!-			 > keligagh-, keligraasiq, keligtugh-, kelilleq	kelig-	kelig-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 -\
keligagh-	rskbuf4-	scrape with long easy strokes															to scrape with long easy strokes		PE k0li!a3- (under PE k0li!-); < kelig-?-				keligagh-	keligagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
keligraasiq	rskbuh6cb2	scraper			rake												scraper; rake		< kelig-ragh-(u)siq				keligrasiq	keligrxsiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
keligtugh-	rskb[ne4-	scrape with short hard strokes															to scrape with short hard strokes		< kelig-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				keligtugh-	keligtugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kelilleq	rskbk]s2	scrapings, especially the material scraped from the inside of a pipe and then added to tobacco															scrapings, especially the material scraped from the inside of a pipe and then added to tobacco		< kelig-lleq				kelilleq	kelilleq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
kellaak	rsk]9r	clock		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 kellaagek,
\f2\i  for one clock; also used in Chukotka; 
\f0\i0 Vuvallam yuga unanguluku pingayumi 
\f2\i kellaagegni
\f0\i0  nekegtaqaat vuvalla. \'91At three 
\f2\i o\'92clock
\f0\i0  the ceremony hosts set up the ceremony.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 47)													clock		from English \'91clock\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R230, V&E85)		
\f0\i0 kellak	kellxk	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
kelli-	rsk]b-	lustful		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  kellikaa \'91he lusts after her, desires her\'92; kelliyugtuq \'91he feels lust, desire\'92	desiring												lustful; desiring		PE 0kli-				kelli-	kelli-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
kellighinaq*	rsk]4byf2	open water between ice in the ocean			polynya												open water between ice in the ocean; polynya		< kelliq-(ng)inaq				kellighinaq*	kellighinaq*	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
kellii	rsk]7	sea		
\f2\i when inflecting, this word acts as the 3s-s possessed form of
\f0\i0  kelliq* (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ketliq 'the one out there'), 
\f2\i thus with non-absolutive endings in
\f0\i0  n (
\f2\i rather than
\f0\i0  m):  kelliinun \'91to the ocean\'92 (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , 'to its 
\f2\i \'93kelliq\'94'
\f0\i0 ); kellii isekinaghtuq \'91the ocean out there is cold\'92; (
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  aywaa, kilgaa, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  uughqa)	ocean												sea; ocean; the ocean						kelli	kellx	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \
kellmighqe-	rsk]v]b52s-	verify		ungipaq nagaquqiinaghyamigu ellmineng angyakun piighaghsimalghii, talwa legan kellmighqegpenaki kinkungutangi ungipat pillghitni angyat aviilnguut \'91as soon as he heard the news he immediately went out with his boat to check and see whether a boat really was missing\'92; Taakut Tzaarankunguut entaqun aghnam aatgha, weni 
\f2\i kellmighqepallghitunga
\f0\i0 . \'91They were \'93Tsar\'94 and family, probably the woman\'92s name, but I really didn\'92t 
\f2\i look into it any further
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQAM. NANGAGH. 2:50)	find out more												to verify; to find out more						kellmighqe-	kellmighqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kellngugh-	rsk]3e4-	past (be in the (recent) ~)		sariiq kellnguqagu wetku aghvigillequnga \'91when the activities are over, only then will I wash some clothes\'92	finished (be ~)	over (be ~)											to be in the (recent) past; to be finished; to be over				CK A & W 37		kellngugh-	kellngugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kelqe-	rsk]2s-	bring along		kelquq \'91he brought something along\'92; kelqaa \'91he brought it along\'92 / Nulughyaghtunga suflugaqa 
\f2\i kelqelluku
\f0\i0 . \'91I went fishing and 
\f2\i brought along
\f0\i0  my rifle.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 76)													to bring along	,thtn xnj-k c cj,jq			CK V & E 138 (Russ voc)		kelqe-	kelqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kelu, keluta	rsk/. rsk/nf	behind (area ~ building)		kelunga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kelutanga \'91the area behind it or back from it, its back area\'92; kelutangani \'91behind it, on the side of it away from the shore, in the back of it\'92; kelutmun \'91towards the area behind town\'92; 
\f2\i opposite of 
\f0\i0 keta	back (area ~ from shore)	back area of room or house opposite the entrance											area behind building; area back from shore; back area of room or house opposite the entrance		PE k0lu				kelu, keluta	kelu, keluta	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 , \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1090 \u1072 \
kelugilnguq*	rskeubk3e2	stitch, thin		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; what exactly does \'91thin stitch\'92 mean?				thin stitch	njyrbq ijd	
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 < keluk-(ng)ite-nguq		Rub. 229		kelugilnguq*	kelugilnguq*	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
Kelugnaan Naayvaa	Rsk/uy6y Y6qd6	Kiloknak Lagoon at east end of St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kiloknak Lagoon at east end of St. Lawrence Is.		< kelugnaq-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + naayvaq-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxn	Kelugnan Nayva	Kelugnxn Nxyvx	\uc0\u1050 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u257 \u1085  \u1053 \u257 \u1253 \u1074 \u257 \
keluk	rsk/r	stitch															stitch		PE k0lu!				keluk	keluk	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \
kelulghun	rsk/k4ey	rope attached to the foundation of a winter house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rope attached to the foundation of a winter house		< kelu-?-(u)n		CK Rub 229		kelulghun	kelulghun	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
kelulighaq	rsk/kb4f2	beam in the frame of the
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 beam in the frame of the 
\f2\i aagra, 
\f0\i0 the
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		< kelu-ligh-aq		CK Rub 229		kelulighaq	kelulighaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kelusiqaq	rsk/cb2f2	dry walrus skin which is used to cover the summer house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 dry walrus skin which is used to cover the summer house		< kelu-?		CK Rub 230		kelusiqaq	kelusiqaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
keluvagh-	rsk/df4-	back (go to the ~)			go to the back												go to the back 		PE k0luva3- (under PE k0lu); < kelu-vagh-				keluvagh-	keluvagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
keluvaq	rsk/df2	back (area far to the ~)		keluvani \'91in the area way back\'92													area far to the back 		< kelu-vaq				keluvaq	keluvaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
kelwaya	rsk1fz	ceremony (traditional Chukchi ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)													
\f0\i0 traditional Chukchi ceremony	xerjncrbq nhflbwbjyysq ghfplybr	from Chukchi ? (perhaps related to kel0, kel\'920 \'91evil spirit\'92)	x	CK V & E 98; Rub 228		kelwaya	kelwaya	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1265 \u1072 \u1103 \
kemagluk	rsvfuk/r	vegetable (sea ~)		
\f2\i grey in color, bitter and salty in taste; exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 sea vegetable						kemagluk	kemagluk	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \
kemagnaq	rsvfuyf2	lung		Aghallegtam nagatusignekun nagatii 
\f2\i kemagnanka
\f0\i0 . \'91The doctor listened to my 
\f2\i lungs
\f0\i0  with a stethoscope.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 107); kemagnam sefluwaaghi \'91bronchial tubes\'92													lung		PY-S k0ma!naq				kemagnaq	kemagnaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
kemeghqegkaq	rsvs52s[rf2	dish of cooked, boned, and flaked salmn meat mixed with whipped sea mammal oil (and optionally berries)															dish of cooked, boned, and flaked salmn meat mixed with whipped sea mammal oil (and optionally berries)				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 71		kemeghqegkaq	kemeghqegkaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
kemegmik	rsvsuvbr	underwear															underwear		< kemek-mik				kemegmik	kemegmik	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
kemegtungiq	rsvs[ne3b2	shrimp or shrimplike creature		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kemek									could this be krill?				shrimp or shrimp-like creature						kemegtungiq	kemegtungiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
kemek	rsvsr	flesh			skin	relative(s) (one\'92s own \'93flesh and blood\'94)											flesh; skin; relative(s) (one\'92s own \'93flesh and blood\'94)		PE k0m0!				kemek	kemek	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \
kemekrak	rsvsrifr	meat		gaaghaa neghsam kemekraga \'91he cooked the seals meat\'92	piece of meat	relative (kin)								kin			meat; piece of meat; relative; kin		< kemek-krak				kemekrak	kemekrak	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
kemengquk	rsvs32er	underwear for male		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				male underwear	gfhf ve;crjuj ,tkmz	< kemek-?		Rub. 231		kemengquk	kemengquk	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \
kemgenu	rsvusye	string of beads		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 beads (string of ~)												string of beads				CK Rub 230		kemgenu	kemgenu	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1075 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \
kemgite-	rsvubns-	skinny (be ~)															to be skinny		< kemek-(ng)ite-				kemgite-	kemgite-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kemk-	rsvr-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kemkelleghaq, kemkiili-; = kumk-																			kemk-	kemk-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 -\
kemkeghnak	rsvrs4yfr	sea vegetable (tiny pinkish-orange ~)		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined	
\f0\i0 \'93sea carrot\'94								needs species identification				tiny pinkish-orange sea vegetable, sometimes called "sea carrot"						kemkeghnak	kemkeghnak	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
kemkelleghaq	rsvrsk]s4f2	food particle between teeth															food particle between teeth		< kemk-?-				kemkelleghaq	kemkelleghaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b kemkema\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rsvrsvf\super s	\nosupersub food made of reindeer tallow and meat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 food made of reindeer tallow and meat				Rub.  230		kemkemae	kemkemae	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
kemkiili-	rsvr7kb-	remove food particle from between teeth		kemkiiliiq \'91he is picking his teeth\'92 /= kumkiili-	pick one\'92s teeth												to pick one's teeth; remove food particle from between teeth		PE kumka(C)ili- (under PE kumka3)				kemkili-	kemkxli-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1251 \u1083 \u1080 -\
kemkiilin	rsvr7kby	toothpick		= kemkiilisiq													toothpick		< kemkiili-(u)n				kemkilin	kemkxlin	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1251 \u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \
kemkiilisiq	rsvr7kbcb2	toothpick		= kemkiilin, kumkiilisiq													toothpick		< kemkiili-(u)siq				kemkilisiq	kemkxlisiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1251 \u1083 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kemnagh-	rsvyf4-	capacious (be ~)		kemnaghtuq \'91it holds a lot\'92 /	spacious (be ~)	hold a lot											to be capacious; to be spacious; to hold a lot						kemnagh-	kemnagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ken\'92gughaasiq	rsyue46cb2	chisel		ken\'92gughaasimeng peqiglluku taqmiighaa \'91he used the chisel and finished his work\'92; qamislimi ken\'92gughaasit atupiwaaqut \'91when making a sled, chisels are very useful\'92													chisel		< ?-(u)siq		CK A & W 37		ken\'92gughasiq	ken\'92gughxsiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
keneghmig-	rsys4vbu-	place in gathered front of garment		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf. 
\f0\i0 keniq													to place in gathered front of garment		PE k0ni3mi!0 (under PE k0ni3)		CK Rub 233		keneghmig-	keneghmig-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
kenegte-	rsys[ns-	press		kenegtaa \'91he pressed on it\'92 / kenegtiiq \'91he pressed something; ken\'92gutaa \'91he pressed it onto something\'92													to press		PE t0n0!-				kenegte-	kenegte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kenelghutak	rsysk4enfr	lamp (kerosene burning or the like)															lamp (kerosene burning or the like)		< keneq-lghutaq-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 kenelghutak	kenelghutak	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \

\f1\b keneligh-, kenigh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rsyskb4-. rsyb4-\super \'a1	\nosupersub shine light on (it)			put a light in (it)												to shine a light on (it), put a light in (it)		< keneq-ligh-				keneligh-, kenigh-1	keneligh-, kenigh-1	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -, \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\super 1\
\nosupersub keneq	rsys2	fire		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 kenghek
\f2\i , for one fire or light; used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 kenghet, 
\f2\i for electricity; 
\f0\i0 ighivgaatanga tamaghhaan kenghek kumaghllukek uzimun nekevuulluta ungipaghaataqukut \'91each night we build a fire and stand around telling stories\'92	electric light	light, electric								electricity			fire; electric light; electricity						keneq	keneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
keneqetaaghek	rsys2sn64sr	lamp  			lantern												lamp, lantern	kfvgf\\ ajyfh]	< keneq-qetaagh-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 keneqetaghek	keneqetxghek	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1099 \u1082 \
kenghhwaataq	rsy516nf2	light for the outer room (as of a traditional house)		kenghhwaataq kumaghhnakesi mamlegfagilgan \'91turn on the outer room light before it gets dark\'92; kenghhwaatat nanistun peqalget uqulget angqaperuget mekestaaghhaat nanineng \'91lights for the outer room have wicks and oil blubber like the seal oil lamp and are round, but smaller than the usual seal oil lamp\'92													light for the outer room (as of a traditional style house)		< keneq-?		CK A & W 37		kenghhwataq	kenghhwxtaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1203 \u1265 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kenghhwaq	rsy51f2	ceremonial oil lamp or fire		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 kenghhwak, 
\f2\i for one such ceremonial lamp or fire; 
\f0\i0 Apeghiighyami 
\f2\i kenghhwak
\f0\i0  kumaghllukek, sasiqumtaaghat
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 ayumiq 
\f2\i kenghhwighluteng
\f0\i0  neqa 
\f2\i kenghhwam
\f0\i0  uvitanganun llilaghtughllagaqluku. \'91When he 
\f2\i kindled
\f0\i0  a 
\f2\i ceremonial
\f0\i0  fire; it was their age-old custom to build a 
\f2\i ceremonial fire
\f0\i0  and place food around the 
\f2\i fire
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:256)	lamp (ceremonial oil ~)	fire (ceremonial fire)											ceremonial oil lamp; ceremonial fire	ghfplybxysq ;bhybr	< keneq-?		Rub. 233		kenghhwaq	kenghhwaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1203 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
kenghwaaq	rsy4162	night lamp			lamp (night ~)												night lamp		< keneq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				kenghwaq	kenghwxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b kenigh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rsyb4-\super \'99	\nosupersub point at		kenighaa \'91he pointed at it\'92 /													to point at						kenigh-2	kenigh-2	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub kenileq	rsybks2	passage, cleared of shore ice, for boats to go out to sea		
\f2\i also plural, 
\f0\i0 kenilghet,
\f2\i  used for one passage; 
\f0\i0 Taagken angyaq angyilghaneng ateghlluku, taakutlu neqet qaakluki angyamun, kanavek 
\f2\i kenileghnun
\f0\i0  angyaq atghaataqaat. \'91Then after taking the boat down from the boat rack, they put those [ceremonial] food in the boat, and took the boat down to the 
\f2\i launching place
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:206)	boat path or launching place (on sea ice)	launching place for boat (on sea ice)											passage, cleared of shore ice, for boats to go out to sea; boat path or launching place (on sea ice)						kenileq	kenileq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
keniliigh-	rsybk74-	clear a passage for boats															to clear a passage for boats		< kenileq-liigh-				keniligh-	kenilxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
keniq	rsyb2	skirt of parka or dress		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 keneghmig-													skirt of parka or dress		PE k0ni3				keniq	keniq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \
keniqaan	rsyb26y	knob (originally ivory, now also metal) on shaft of harpon to which line from harpoon head is attached			cervical vertebra												knob (originally ivory, now also metal) on shaft of harpon to which line from harpoon head is attached; cervical vertebra				gloss 2 Rub 231		keniqan	keniqxn	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u257 \u1085 \
keniqagh-	rsyb2f4-	point with the middle finger from anger		ugumiyagulluku sameng pigpenaan keniqaghluku unisimakanga \'91he became angry at him, so he pointed at him with his middle finger with out saying anything and left him\'92													to point with the middle finger from anger		< kenigh\super 2\nosupersub -?-		CK A & W 38		keniqagh-	keniqagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kenite-	rsybns-	soak		kenitaa \'91he is soaking it\'92 /	soak a skin preparatory to stretching it onto a boat frame												to soak; to soak a skin preparatory to stretching it onto a boat frame						kenite-	kenite-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b kenla\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rsykz\super s	\nosupersub end		kenlelighaa \'91he put a limit to it\'92	source	reason behind something								limit			end; source; reason behind something; boundary; limit; edge		PE k0nl0				kenlae	kenlae	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
kenlanga	rsykz3f	continuing from then, or until then		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Taagken 
\f2\i kenlanga
\f0\i0  meteghlluk tagneghtaa, teghla aqaleghyagughtaa. \'91
\f2\i Continuing
\f0\i0  from that point on the raven has been black and the owl variegated.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 28); 
\f2\i Drum
\f0\i0 -a tamaana ullghitaghtaghluku atghaataqaat 
\f2\i kenlanga
\f0\i0  naangellghanun. \'91They would roll the drums back 
\f2\i until
\f0\i0  they were all finished.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:52); Taagken 
\f2\i kenlanga
\f0\i0  yuggaq unangyiitkuvinghaaq unangyughqaamakanga. \'91Then so, 
\f2\i from then on
\f0\i0 , the man who was once an unsuccessful hunter, was now a very successful hunter.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 119); Apeghnaqaqa ungipaghaq 
\f2\i kenlanga
\f0\i0  naangwaaghtestellghanun kaalluku. \'91I will tell the story 
\f2\i until
\f0\i0  I reach the very end.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 77)									need more examples!!!				continuing from then, or until then		< kenla-
\f2\i possessed ending				
\f0\i0 kenlanga	kenlanga	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1072 \
kenle-	rsyks-	heart of the matter (get to the ~)		kenlaapestaghhaaneng \'91from the very start\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kenla													to get to the heart of the matter						kenle-	kenle-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 -\
Kenleghaghmii(t)	Rsyks4f4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)		
\f2\i in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 a particular clan		< kenla-?-mii		CK V & E 76	xxxt	Kenleghaghmi(t)	Kenleghaghmx(t)	\uc0\u1050 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Kenleghaq	Rsyks4f2	village site east of Sireniki in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 village site east of Sireniki (Sighinek) in Chukotka				CK and others		Kenleghaq	Kenleghaq	\uc0\u1050 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kenlengnaqe-	rsyks3yf2s-	ask			inquiries (make ~ about)	understand (try to ~)							check; what is the postbase? (cf. CAY -ngnaqe- \'91to try\'92)	find out (try to ~)			to ask; to make inquiries about; to try to understand or find out	hfccghfibdfnm. yfdjlbnm cghfdrb j rjv-xtv-k>> cnfhfnmcz gjyznm xnj-k>.dsgsnsdfnm xnj-k> e rjuj-k>	< kenla-nge-naqe-		Rub. 232; and VK\'92s notes		kenlengnaqe-	kenlengnaqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kenlughmun	rsyke4vey	instead		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  kenlughmun uyughaan liisimakeftaa \'91his younger brother knew it instead of him\'92; kenlughmun angelleghtani uteghmun apeghtughii \'91instead he taught someone older than he was (where it was supposed to be the older teaching the younger)\'92; kenlughmun \'91(going) the opposite way; (acting) to the contrary\'92	least expected (in the ~ way or place; by the ~ person)	contrary or opposite way (in a ~)											instead; in the least expected way or place; by the least expected person; in a contrary or opposite way		< kenluq-
\f2\i terminalis		
\f0\i0 CK A & W 38		kenlughmun	kenlughmun	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1091 \u1271 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
kenluq*	rsyk/2	opposite			contrary	least expected thing											opposite; contrary; least expected thing		PE k0nlu3				kenluq*	kenluq*	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1102 \u1179 \
kenluqsagneq	rsyke2cfuys2	stingy (one who is ~)		yuggaq taana kenluqsagnepiguuq \'91that man is too cautious or is too stingy\'92; sariighmun kenluqsagniqaquq awen \'91he often hesitates to join in when there is some activity taking place\'92	limits (one who ~ his actions excessively)	hesitates (one who ~)								cautious (one who is ~)			one who is stingy; one who limits his actions excessively; one who hesitates; one who is overly cautious		< kenluq-?-neq\super 2		\nosupersub CK A & W 38		kenluqsagneq	kenluqsagneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1091 \u1179 \u1089 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
kenmaangqaq	rsyv632f2	water behind shore line caused by high waves flooding area			lagoon												water behind shore line caused by high waves flooding area; lagoon		from Chukchi k0nma&q0 \'91lagoon\'92	14			kenmangqaq	kenmxngqaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1084 \u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b kenmawa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rsyvf1f\super s	\nosupersub strip of wood, transverse, in frame of the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , the
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 transverse narrow strip of wood in frame of the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , insulated
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		from Chukchi k0nmen \'91wall of sleeping compartment\'92		CK Rub 232		kenmawae	kenmawae	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1084 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1099 \
kennaqe-	rsy]f2s-	set out (be going to or intending to ~ in a boat from the shore)		angyat kennaqut \'91the boat is about to leave\'92; 
\f2\i Kennaqinaamaamta
\f0\i0  elalluugtaa. \'91
\f2\i Before we left with the boat
\f0\i0  the weather got bad.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 48)	put out to sea								sounds good; we have it as an example already, but it should be a separate entry				to be going to or intending to set out in a boat from the shore; to put out to sea	cj,bhfnmcz. yfvthtdfnmcz cgecnbnm celyj yf djle.cj,bhfnmcz. yfvthtdfnmcz jnxfkbnm	< kete-naqe-		Rub. 233 and elsewhere		kennaqe-	kennaqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kennataq	rsy]fnf2	lamp/stove, small, used in outer room of the traditional dome-shaped house															small lamp/stove used in outer room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< kete-?-(u)taq				kennataq	kennataq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kennigh-	rsy]b4-	remove an extra oil-lamp		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 put away the oil-lamp for the seance of the shaman												to remove an extra oil-lamp; to put away the oil-lamp for the seance of the shaman				CK Rub 233		kennigh-	kennigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kenqignagh-	rsy2buyf4-	disciplined person (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 modest (be ~)												to be a disciplined person; to be modest	lbcwbgkbybhjdfyysq\\ crhjvysq			CK V & E 131		kenqignagh-	kenqignagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Kentanga	Rsynf3f	Kintanga Bay (and Pt.) on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kintanga Bay (and Pt.) on St. Lawrence Is.						Kentanga	Kentanga	\uc0\u1050 \u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \
kentate-	rsynfns-	successful (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan									
\f0\i0 check to see if also used on SLI				to be successful		from Chukchi k0ntet0k \'91be successful\'92	14			kentate-	kentate-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Kentuqaq	Rsyne2f2	Gambell (south peak of the mountain behind ~)		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 south peak of the mountain behind Gambell						Kentuqaq	Kentuqaq	\uc0\u1050 \u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
kenu-	rsye-	poke		kenaa \'91he poked it\'92 / kenugu savigmeng \'91poke it with the knife point!\'92	push into with a pointed instrument	bore								test ice			to poke; to push into with a pointed instrument; to bore; to test ice		PE t0nu-			; > kenugragh-, kenuketaq, kenuqagh-, kenuregh-	kenu-	kenu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 -\
kenugilgnuq*	rsyeubkuye2	needle, round															round needle.		< kenuk-(ng)ite-nguq				kenugilgnuq*	kenugilgnuq*	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \
kenugragh-	rsyeuhf4-	press with knuckles															to press with knuckles		< kenu-?-ragh-				kenugragh-	kenugragh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kenuk	rsyer	edge			ridge												edge; ridge						kenuk	kenuk	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \
kenuketaq	rsyersnf2	plug		= kenukutaq	stopper used for sealskin pokes, floats, holes in a boat, etc.												plug; stopper used for sealskin pokes, floats, holes in a boat, etc.		< kenu-qutaq				kenuketaq	kenuketaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kenukutaq	rsyerenf2	plug		= kenuketaq	stopper used for sealskin pokes, floats, holes in a boat, etc.												plug; stopper used for sealskin pokes, floats, holes in a boat, etc.		< kenu-qutaq				kenukutaq	kenukutaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b kenulek\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rsyeksr\super \'a1	\nosupersub needle (three-cornered skin-sewing ~)															three-cornered skin-sewing needle		< kenuk-lek				kenulek1	kenulek1	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 1\

\f1\b kenulek\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rsyeksr\super \'99	\nosupersub codfish type		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined; 
\f0\i0 = qenulek									species?				type of codfish		< kenuk-lek		CK Rub 233		kenulek2	kenulek2	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 2\
kenuqagh-	rsye2f4-	stab															to stab		< kenu-?-				kenuqagh-	kenuqagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kenuregh-	rsyehs4-	poke hard with the finger											note that Rub. glosses this as \'91to hurt someone\'92				to poke hard with the finger		< kenu-?-				kenuregh-	kenuregh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 -\
kenuugte-	rsy8[ns-	develop points (of clouds)		qilaga kenuugtaa \'91the sky is getting elongated pointed clouds (as before a storm)\'92													to develop points (of clouds)		< kenuk-?-				kenugte-	kenxgte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kepe-	rsgs-	cut off		kepuq \'91it got cut, severed\'92; kepaa \'91he cut it, severed it\'92 / kepumaaq \'91it has been cut, severed\'92; kepneq\'92 a cut-off piece\'92; kepigalnguq something \'91that cannot be cut, severed\'92	cut in half across the short dimension	sever								discontinue			to cut off; to cut in half across the short dimension; to sever; to discontinue		PE k0p0-			; > kepkagh-,kepliigh-, kepugh-	kepe-	kepe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 -\
kepelleq	rsgsk]s2	tub		
\f2\i used in the dual
\f0\i0 , kepellghek, 
\f2\i for one tub													
\f0\i0 tub						kepelleq	kepelleq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
kepkagh-	rsgrf4-	snap in two		kepkaghaghsaghtuq \'91it is about to snap\'92	break in two												to snap in two; to break in two		PE k0p(0)ka3-; < kepe-kagh-				kepkagh-	kepkagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1087 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Kepkaghyalqak	Rsgrf4zk]2fr	Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is. (site on ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.						Kepkaghyalqak	Kepkaghyalqak	\uc0\u1050 \u1099 \u1087 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \
kepliigh-	rsgk]74-	cut bangs		kepliightuq \'91he cut his (own) bangs\'92; kepliighaa \'91he cut her bangs\'92 /													to cut bangs		PE k0pli3-  (under PE k0p0-); < kepe-?-				kepligh-	keplxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1087 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
kepliiq	rsgk]72	bangs (hair)		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  kepliighet	hair (bangs of ~)												bangs of hair						keplighet	keplxghet	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1087 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1179 \
kepsiigalnguq*	rsgc7ufk3e2	shrimp type (small)															shrimp type (small)		< kepsugh-(ng)igate-nguq				kepsigalnguq*	kepsxgalnguq*	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1251 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
kepsiiqu-	rsgc72e-	lend a hand		aghnaghaam aghayuqagni kepsiiqwaak neghelghiik \'91the girl helped out her parents when they were eating\'92; ighsaningilnguum ilani kepsiiqwaaqii \'91a person who is not lazy helps others\'92; apelqat kepsiiqwaaghteki \'91please help the guests\'92	helpful (be ~)	help out											to lend a hand; to be helpful; to help out				CK A & W 38		kepsiqu-	kepsxqu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \u1091 -\
kepsugh-	rsgc/4-	full stomach (have a ~)		kepsughtuq \'91he is full\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is satiated\'92 / neqa kepsughnaghtuq \'91the food is filling\'92; kepsughsiin? \'91are you full?\'92; kepsughtunga \'91I am full\'92; 
\f2\i Kepsughpenaamta
\f0\i0  ilagameng taaqukut. \'91We quit singing before we 
\f2\i were satiated
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 78)	satiated (be ~)	enough (have ~)											to have a full stomach; to be satiated; to have enough						kepsugh-	kepsugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\
kepugh-	rsge4-	cut up completely		aghnam panini kepughaa \'91the woman cut her daughter\'92s hair\'92	cut hair (in appropriate context)	cut short											to cut up completely; to cut short; to cut hair (in appropriate context)		< kepe-ugh-				kepugh-	kepugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kepusiq	rsgecb2	saw, rotary electric		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 kepusik, 
\f2\i for one saw	
\f0\i0 skilsaw												rotary electric saw; \'93skilsaw\'94		< kepe-(u)siq-
\f2\i dual		
\f0\i0 CK		kepusiq	kepusiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1087 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kerek	rshsr	come! (to call puppy)		
\f2\i particle; articulated repeatedly to call a puppy													
\f0\i0 come! (to call puppy)						kerek	kerek	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1082 \
kergam	rshufv	no sooner than		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Angayuqanka nallukanka, anglegutenka.  
\f2\i Kergam
\f0\i0  taghnughhaalunga iflalaghasimalghiit. \'91I didn\'92t know my parents or siblings. I was 
\f2\i no more
\f0\i0  than a child when they died.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:106)	ready to act												no sooner than; ready to act		from Chukchi \'93kirga\'92m\'94 \'91well now\'92			> kergamqun	kergam	kergam	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1075 \u1072 \u1084 \
kergamqun	rshufv2ey	just when		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 just when		< kergam=qun				kergamqun	kergamqun	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1075 \u1072 \u1084 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
keskesaagh-	rscrsc94-	shoo away a puppy using the expression "kes-kes".															to shoo away a puppy using the expression "kes-kes".						keskesagh-	keskesxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
kesnaghte-	rscy]f5ns-	ask for the fulfilment of a promise		kesnaghtaa \'91he reminded him\'92 /	remind												to ask for the fulfilment of a promise; to remind						kesnaghte-	kesnaghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
keste-	rscns-	count		kestaa \'91he counted it\'92 (
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  kestii \'91he counted them\'92) / kestiiq \'91he counted something\'92; Kayutanka 
\f2\i kesaqenka
\f0\i0  akimigaaftut. \'91When I 
\f2\i counted
\f0\i0  the fish I caught, there were fifteen.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 78)													to count		PE k0cit-				keste-	keste-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kestisiq	rscnbcb2	counting (the act or art of ~)		Igameng, 
\f2\i kestisimeng
\f0\i0  apeghtughaqegkangit. \'91They taught them writing and 
\f2\i counting 
\f0\i0 (or the letters and the 
\f2\i numbers
\f0\i0 ).\'92 (SIVUQ. UNGIP. 2)	number	numeral											the act or art of counting; number; numeral		< keste-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq		VK\'92s notes		kestisiq	kestisiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kestusiq	rscnecb2	numeral			number												numeral; number		< keste-(u)siq		SLI JR. DICT. 87; VK\'92s notes		kestusiq	kestusiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kesutke-	rscenrs-	count somebody or something in		kesutkellunga whangallu nengighqennakesi \'91count me in and divide them up\'92; kestikumta kesutkelleqaghput \'91we will count him in when we count them\'92	add												to count somebody or something in; to add		< keste-(u)tke-		CK A & W 38		kesutke-	kesutke-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
ketaatkin	rsn6nrby	but unfortunately		
\f2\i particle; Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 unfortunately (but ~)												but unfortunately		from Chukchi k0t\'92atke \'91only, in spite of; unfortunately, very bad\'92				ketatkin	ketxtkin	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \

\f1\b keta\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rsnf\super s	\nosupersub front (area in ~)		ketngani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ketangani \'91in front of it\'92; 
\f2\i opposite of
\f0\i0  kelu; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kellii	water (area toward ~ (ocean))	entrance to the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house											area in front; area towards water (ocean); entrance to the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		PE k0t0-				ketae	ketae	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \
ketamsaswha	rsnfvczc1]f	at once		
\f2\i particle; Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 suddenly	unexpectedly											at once; suddenly; unexpectedly; in a little while with determination		form Chukchi k0tamsaswa \'91suddenly, unexpectedly\'92		lst gloss from VK		ketamsaswha	ketamsaswha	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \u1089 \u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \
ketanqu-	rsnfy2e-	run		ketanquuq \'91he ran\'92 / ketanqutaa \'91he ran off with it\'92; Naayvam kenlenganeng 
\f2\i ketanquperiwaaghmeng
\f0\i0  tagiinga. \'91I came 
\f2\i running
\f0\i0  all the way from the end of the lake.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 78); 
\f2\i Ketanqwaaghaghaquq
\f0\i0 , araghataghaquq, ivaghaqaa naani. \'91She 
\f2\i ran
\f0\i0  around screaming, looking for her mother.\'92 (YUP. ULUNG. 2:86)													to run		from Chukchi k0t!0ntat- \'91run\'92				ketanqu-	ketanqu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 -\
ketanqusnaq	rsnfy2ecy]f2	running fast		
\f2\i adverbial particle;
\f0\i0  Alinguq, uuvganeng araamaghmi 
\f2\i ketanqusnaq
\f0\i0  qimagtuq. \'91She was frightened and from that moment screaming she fled 
\f2\i running fast
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:208)													running fast		< ketanqu-?				ketanqusnaq	ketanqusnaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \
kete-	rsns-	go out to sea		ketuq \'91he launched, he or it (boat) went out to sea\'92 / kennaquq \'91he\'92s ready to launch, he's putting out to sea\'92; ketutaat \'91they launched it, they took it out to sea\'92; 
\f2\i this is the verbal counterpart of
\f0\i0  keta\super e	\nosupersub out (go ~ to sea)	sea (go out to ~)								launch a boat			to launch a boat; to go out to sea		PE k0t0-				kete-	kete-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ketfagh-	rsnaf4-	go far out to sea		ketfaamakanga \'91she brought it out\'92 	come out to an open place in full view												to go far out to sea; to come out to an open place in full view		PE k0tva3- (under PE k0t0-); < kete-vagh-				ketfagh-	ketfagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1092 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ketfaghte-	rsnaf5ns-	recollet															to recollect		< ketfagh-te\super 1\nosupersub -				ketfaghte-	ketfaghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1092 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ketligh-	rsnk]b4-	betray		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to betray				CK Rub 236		ketligh-	ketligh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ketliq	rsnk]\uc0\u8747 2	neighbor living toward the south		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 exit (one sitting nearer to ~)												neighbor living toward the south; one sitting nearer to exit	cjctl. ;bdeobq c /;yjq cnjhjys. cblzobq ,kb;t r ds[jle	< keta-liq		Rub. 237 CK		ketliq	ketliq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u769 \u1179 \
Ketliqaq	Rsnk]b2f2	Kookoolik Cape on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kookoolik Cape on St. Lawrence Is.		< kete-liq-qaq				Ketliqaq	Ketliqaq	\uc0\u1050 \u1099 \u1090 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
ketmiighte-	rsnv75ns-	go down along the river		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 swim out from shore to sea												to go down along the river; to swim out from shore to sea	blnb. t[fnm yb;t.  gksnm jn ,thtuf d vjht	< keta-miighte-		Rub. 237		ketmighte-	ketmxghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1084 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ketmun	rsnv]ey	out to sea			outwards	toward water or exit								away from shore (into the sea)			out to sea; outwards; toward water; toward exit; away from shore (into the sea)		< keta-tmun (
\f2\i note, not 
\f0\i0 *ketetmun)				ketmun	ketmun	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1091 \u1085 \
ketngig-	rsn3bu-	kick (especially with the bottom of one's heel)															to kick (especially with the bottom of one's heel)		PE kitmi!				ketngig-	ketngig-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1080 \u1075 -\
ketngigpalluq	rsn3b[gfk]/2	high-heeled shoe			shoe, high-heeled												high-heeled shoe		< ketngik-palluq				ketngigpalluq	ketngigpalluq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1080 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \
ketngiitet	rsn37nsn	Achilles tendon			tendon, Achilles												Achilles tendon		< ketngik-(u)n-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 ketngitet	ketngxtet	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \
ketngik	rsn3br	heel															heel		PE kitmi!				ketngik	ketngik	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1080 \u1082 \
Ketngipalak	Rsn3]bgfkzr	Kitnepaluk Cr. mouth on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 mouth of Kitnepaluk Cr. on St. Lawrence Is.		< ketngik-?				Ketngipalak	Ketngipalak	\uc0\u1050 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \
ketsighaq	rsncb4f2	pole holding the reindeer hide curtain of the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house															pole holding the reindeer hide curtain of the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house				CK A & W 38		ketsighaq	ketsighaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ketwhelqun	rsn1sk]2ey	still		
\f2\i particle; a comment on change or continuance;
\f0\i0  ketwhelqun sugagpenani nuqetuq qasiigalkangat \'91he still didn\'92t get angry even if they were giving him a hard time\'92; umegneghughtaa ketwhelqun muluulghii aliineghluk \'91it finally got stormy after a long period of good weather\'92; \'85 qaya paamna nenglulighvigilnguq tangeghtughllak. 
\f2\i Ketwhelqun
\f0\i0 , Uygunani kana allameng taana Kangkiilghem asinganiqun, taghnughhaghhiit estungigatut. \'91\'85 the hillside it was too hard for making underground houses. 
\f2\i On the other hand you know,
\f0\i0  at Uygunat, down there below Kangkiileq, (it was so steep that it\'92s a wonder that) children didn't slide off them.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:18)	finally												still; finally		from Chukchi k0tw0l \'91only, if only, although, nevertheless\'92		CK A & W 38 CK 		ketwhelqun	ketwhelqun	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1265 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
kevaawagh-	rsd61f4-	raise		aliighaqaa qilaga kevaawaghtaa \'91it is clearing up, the skies are lifting up\'92; qilaglluk kevaawaghsaqminigu sukalluni alighaa \'91when the storm clouds lifted up, it quickly cleared up\'92	elevate	place higher											to raise; to elevate; to place higher		< keveg-?-		CK A & W 38		kevawagh-	kevxwagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u257 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kevaghqu-	rsdf52e-	lift a bit to check the weight of something		kevaghquuq \'91he lifted something to check its weight\'92; kevaghqwaa \'91he lifted it to check its weight\'92 /													to lift a bit to check the weight of something		< keveg-?-				kevaghqu-	kevaghqu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 -\
keveg-	rsdsu-	lift		kevegtuq (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kevgiiq) \'91he lifted something\'92; kevgaa \'91he lifted it\'92 /													to lift		PE k0v0!-				keveg-	keveg-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1075 -\
kevgaagh-	rsdu64-	hold and carry after lifting 		
\f2\i as when holding a baby													
\f0\i0 to hold and carry after lifting	lth;bn xnj-rjuj-k gjlyzd	< keveg-aagh-		CK V & E 138 (RUSs Voc)	; > kevgaayugneq	kevgagh-	kevgxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1075 \u257 \u1271 -\
kevgaasluk	rsdu6ck]/r	errand runner		uyughateng anglegutangita kevgaaslugat \'91they let their younger brother run around doing errands all the time\'92; kevgaasluguneghmeng qinuyagutaquq \'91he is getting sick and tired of going around on errands all the time\'92													errand runner		< kevgaagh-?		CK A & W 38 CK 		kevgasluk	kevgxsluk	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1075 \u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
kevgaayugneq	rsdu6/uys2	obliging person															obliging person		< kevgaagh-yug-neq\super 2				\nosupersub kevgayugneq	kevgxyugneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1075 \u257 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
kevigh-	rsdb4-	stuff		kevighaa \'91he stuffed it, plugged it, loaded it\'92 / kevighiiq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  keviituq \'91he stuffed something\'92	plug	load (a gun) 								fill (a hole, crack, etc.)			to stuff; to plug; to load (a gun); to fill (a hole, crack, etc.)		PE k0vi3-				kevigh-	kevigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kevighqaq	rsdb52f2	intestine (part of large ~ of reindeer)			reindeer intestine (part of large ~)	container filled with meat for eating later								down-filled comforter			part of large intestine of reindeer; container filled with meat for eating later; down-filled comforter		< kevigh-kaq				kevighqaq	kevighqaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
keviin	rsd7y	moss insulation			insulation, moss												moss insulation		< kevigh-(u)n				kevin	kevxn	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1251 \u1085 \
keviiq	rsd72	reindeer sausage, home-made		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 sausage, reindeer, home-made								check				home-made reindeer sausage	ljvfiyzz rjk,fcf bp jktybys	< kevigh-?		Rub. 226		keviq	kevxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1251 \u1179 \
keviiti-	rsd7nb-	prepare meat for storage by putting it in containers															to prepare meat for storage by putting it in containers		< kevigh-(u)te-i\super 1\nosupersub -				keviti-	kevxti-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1251 \u1090 \u1080 -\
Kevipak	Rsdbgfr	Kiveepuk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kiveepuk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		< keviq-? (?)				Kevipak	Kevipak	\uc0\u1050 \u1099 \u1074 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
keviq	rsdb2	container made from part of large intestine of reindeer		
\f2\i apparently a direct nominalization of 
\f0\i0 kevigh-													container made from part of large intestine of reindeer						keviq	keviq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1080 \u1179 \
keviqaataq	rsdb26nf2	meat stored by being stuffed in a skin sack															meat stored by being stuffed in a skin sack		< kevigh-?-(u)taq (?)				keviqataq	keviqxtaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1080 \u1179 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kevyunagh-	rsd]/yf4-	unappetizing (be ~ (of food))															to be unappetizing (of food)				CK B Slwooko		kevyunagh-	kevyunagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b kewaaya\super e\nosupersub , kewaayi	
\f0\b0 rs16z\super s\nosupersub . rs16qb	special dish or meal for ceremony			tasty food												special dish or meal for ceremony; tasty food		from Chukchi k0wey \'91gift, treat\'92	14	so glossed in Rub. but VK has it very different: \'93same food eaten over and over\'94		kewayae, kewayi	kewxyae, kewxyi	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1265 \u257 \u1103 \u1099 , \u1082 \u1099 \u1265 \u257 \u1253 \u1080 \
kewaayi-	rs16qb-	take and eat only a certain food over and over											check to see if used also in CAY				to take and eat only a certain food over and over		from Chukchi k0wey \'91gift, treat\'92	14			kewayi-	kewxyi-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1265 \u257 \u1253 \u1080 -\
Keyuuget	Rs0usn	Tomname Lagoon (or the sandspit defining it) on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices									
\f0\i0 could be Kegyuget instead as this is in Apassingok/Walunga				Tomname Lagoon (or the sandspit defining it) on St. Lawrence Is.						Keyuget	Keyxget	\uc0\u1050 \u1099 \u1102 \u772 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \
kezeghhagh-	rsps5f4-	only		
\f2\i used in the quantifier/qualifier construction;
\f0\i0  kezeghhaghmi \'91by himself\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  kezemaghhagh-	alone	by oneself											only; alone; by oneself		PE k09i- with postbase -ghhaq*				kezeghhagh-	kezeghhagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1079 \u1099 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kezemaghhagh-	rspsvf5f4-	only		
\f2\i used in the quantifier/qualifier construction;
\f0\i0  Elngaatall puvallanghani yaywaalilek tamaa elngaatall ellnginaghhaghmeng 
\f2\i kezemaghhaghmeng
\f0\i0 . \'91Whenever the ceremony occured they had an orphan and he lived very much 
\f2\i alone
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:170); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kezeghhaq*	alone	by oneself											only; alone; by oneself		PE k09i- with postbase -ghhaq and intervening postbase				kezemaghhagh-	kezemaghhagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1079 \u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kezemaq	rspsvf2	only child			person who is alone (especially one alone in the wilderness)												only child; person who is alone (especially one alone in the wilderness)		< keze(ghhaq)-?				kezemaq	kezemaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1079 \u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \
kezemtaq	rspsvnf2	animal that is alone															animal that is alone		< keze(ghhaq)-?		CK A & W 50		kezemtaq	kezemtaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1079 \u1099 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kezingughte-	rspb3e5ns-	gather		kezingughtiiqughnguq uqumeng neqesghaghqameng \'91he is saving blubber for fox bait\'92; quumqiighmeng kezingughti \'91gather some wood\'92	save												to gather; to save				CK A & W 39		kezingughte-	kezingughte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1079 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Kigalighaq	Rbufkb4f2	Kialegak (site on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i old village site on Southeast Cape of St. Lawrence Island;
\f0\i0  = Kiyalighaq 
\f2\i (see listing there for more details); see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kialegak						Kigalighaq	Kigalighaq	\uc0\u1050 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kighaq	rb4f2	ice (double layered ~)			double layered ice								what does this mean				double layered ice	yfckjtyys7. ldj7yj7 ktl			CK V & E 24		kighaq	kighaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b kii\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub r7\'a1	wound		kiingi \'91his wounds\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kiligh-													wound		PE 0ki				ki 1	kx 1	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 1\

\f1\b kii\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub r7\'99	gee!		
\f2\i exclamatory particle; 
\f0\i0 Unallu pinighyalghii iigna igaghvik una ukaliq naafqellghem kenlenga taana, pinighllagyalghii. 
\f2\i Kii
\f0\i0  tawani aqfaquuteghllagaqsalghiit. Ilulighneghitgun whangkuta mekestaaghhaghni. \'91This too was good, the school over there, the one on this side, at the end of the ruins, it used to be good. 
\f2\i Gee
\f0\i0 , they used to run there a whole lot. We small ones would participate inside of them.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:16); Mekestaaghhaaluta ighivgaghmillu nulughyaatet taglanghata kayuliiragkiineghmeggni 
\f2\i kii
\f0\i0  puyughllugllawaaquq. \'91When we were small, in school too, when the fisherman came in, they would cook sculpins, and 
\f2\i oh,
\f0\i0  it would become very sooty.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:82); Tawaten ataasimi aghneghmi Kiiluuq aaghhneghlliqumalghii
\fs16  
\fs24  esnamun samavek elqwaaghyaghnaluni. \'85 
\f2\i Kii
\f0\i0 , qagighllaguftughnguq. \'91One day Kiiluuq being stubborn like that went to the shore down there to gather seaweed. 
\f2\i Gee
\f0\i0 , the waves were big, so it is said.\'92 (KIILUUQ 3)	oh!												gee!; oh!						ki2	kx2	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 2\
kiig-	r7u-	summer (be ~)		
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  kiik; kiigu; Pugughileghmiitlu taakut avelghiigalnguut 
\f2\i kiigutanga
\f0\i0  kiyang tamaghhaan, \'85. \'91Those Southwest Cape people never missed the opportunity everytime when it 
\f2\i was summer
\f0\i0 , \'85.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:140)													to be summer		PE ki9a!(-)				kig-	kxg-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1075 -\
Kiigem Aghnaa	R7usv F4y6	May		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  'the woman (mother) of summer'; 
\f2\i also given in various sources as 
\f0\i0 April-May, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  May-June													May		< kiik-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + aghnaq-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxa	Kigem Aghna	Kxgem Aghnx	\uc0\u1050 \u1251 \u1075 \u1099 \u1084  \u1040 \u1271 \u1085 \u257 \
Kiigem Qukaa	R7usv @er6	August		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  'the middle of summer'; 
\f2\i also given in one source as 
\f0\i0 July-August													August		< kiik-
\f2\i relative 
\f0\i0 + qukaq-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxq	Kigem Quka	Kxgem Qukx	\uc0\u1050 \u1251 \u1075 \u1099 \u1084  \u1178 \u1091 \u1082 \u257 \
kiighaghtagh-	r74f5nf4-	feverish (feel ~)		kiighaghtaghtuq \'91he feels feverish or chilled\'92 /	chills (have ~ (from fever or fear))												to feel feverish; to have chills (from fever or fear)		PE ki99i3- (under PE ki9a!(-))				kighaghtagh-	kxghaghtagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kiighmik	r74vbr	middle layer (especially of clothes)															middle layer (especially of clothes)		< kiiq-mik				kighmik	kxghmik	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
kiighragtagh-	r74hf[nf4-	get by as best one can despite lack of knowledge											VK has a different gloss: to try to translate ???				to get by as best one can despite lack of knowledge				CK A & W 39		kighragtagh-	kxghragtagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kiighte-	r75ns-	split (hide or fish)		kiightaa \'91he split it\'92 / kiightiiq \'91he split something\'92; Naama tanpeghek 
\f2\i kiightaak
\f0\i0  ulaaghmeng. \'91My mother 
\f2\i split
\f0\i0  the walrus hide with a semi-lunar knife.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 167)	slice												to split (hide or fish); to slice; to separate something into parts leaving them connected on the side (as when slicing a hot dog bun)		PE 0ki9a3-				kighte-	kxghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kiighutraq	r74enif2	layer of something		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				layer of something	ckjq xtuj-kb,j	< kiiq-?		Rub. 210		kighutraq	kxghutraq	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1096 \u1072 \u1179 \
kiighwyaq	r714mz2	aurora		Ighivgaq 
\f2\i kiighwyaghllaguuq
\f0\i0  elngaatall. \'91The 
\f2\i aurora 
\f0\i0 was really active last night.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 79)	northern lights												aurora; northern lights		PE ki(C)u3ya3				kighwyaq	kxghwyaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1265 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
kiigtaq	r7[nf2	summer (thing of last ~)		kiigtaaguq \'91it is from last summer\'92													thing of last summer		< kiik-taq\super 2				\nosupersub kigtaq	kxgtaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kiigumigh-	r7uevb4-	for there to be a heat wave during winter melting snow and ice		nani tawani uksumi kiigumighaqngami repall kiiwet pinaghluteng pikat \'91one year there was a heat wave during winter and the rivers broke up and flowed\'92													for there to be a heat wave during winter melting snow and ice		< kiik-(ng)u-?-		CK A & W 39		kigumigh-	kxgumigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kiik	r7r	summer		kiilqusiq \'91all summer\'92; kiigtaq \'91something from last summer\'92; kiik 
\f2\i as a particle,
\f0\i0  \'91last summer\'92; 
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  kiig-	last summer												summer; last summer		PE ki9a!(-)			; > Kiigem Aghnaa, Kiigem Qukaa, kiikun	kik	kxk	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1082 \
kiikun	r7rey	next summer		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 summer (next ~)												next summer		< kiik-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 kikun	kxkun	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
kiikw	r7r1	river		
\f2\i usually dual, 
\f0\i0 kiiwek
\f2\i , for one river, 
\f0\i0 kiiwhaak 
\f2\i (a dual)
\f0\i0  \'91stream or creek\'92; Qatelghiim 
\f2\i kiiwek
\f0\i0  kaallukek akimun ayuqelghiik maligsimakek iwerngam esnamun. \'91The fox got to the 
\f2\i river
\f0\i0  and followed it to the ocean.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 156); 
\f2\i Kiiwegnun
\f0\i0  kaalluni qaltani imiimakangi. \'91After getting to a 
\f2\i river
\f0\i0  she filled her buckets.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 44); 
\f2\i note however uses in the grammatical singular (used for a general plural) such as, 
\f0\i0 Tengaaguq enngaatall sama esghapagumaan qulanganeng, uyghagaq, 
\f2\i kiikw
\f0\i0 , naayvaq yuvghiighteghaa.
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 \'91It flew around looking down from above examining the rocks, 
\f2\i the
\f0\i0  
\f2\i rivers
\f0\i0 , and the lakes.\'92 (SIVUQ. UNGIPAGH. II:104); 
\f2\i but also sometimes as a true singular: 
\f0\i0 Piyuneghmininguq 
\f2\i kiiwem
\f0\i0  esnengakun tagiiqelghii. \'91She said that when she used to go for a walk she\'92d come back along the bank of that 
\f2\i river
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:234)													river		PE ku90!			; > kiiwhtaq	kikw	kxkw	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u772 \u1082 \u1265 \
kiilaa-	r7k6-	die from a cut or wound (without being taken)(of game animal)		kiilaallequq ayveq malighquqaat, unakughluku ifliimakangat \'91the walrus they are chasing might die from its wound; they struck it but lost it\'92													to die from a cut or wound (without being taken)(of game animal)		< kii-?-		CK A & W 39		kila-	kxlx-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1083 \u257 -\
kiilqusiq	r7k]2ecb2	all summer			summer (all ~)												all summer	wtkjt ktnj	< kiik-lqusiq				kilqusiq	kxlqusiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kiimllugte-	r7vk]/[ns-	dim (get ~)		kiimllugtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kiimllugtaa \'91it got dim\'92; kiimllugngaaq \'91it is dim\'92; kiimllugtestaa \'91he made it dim\'92													to get dim						kimllugte-	kxmllugte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kiimsigh-	r7vcb4-	reply		Meteghllugem 
\f2\i kiimsighaa
\f0\i0 , "Aa-ha-ha-haa, sangantuq-aa atkugllaka aallaataghsigu? \'91Raven 
\f2\i answered
\f0\i0  him, \'93Ha, ha, ha, why did you put on my big parka?\'92 (Sivuq. Nangagh. 3:234); Sumeghmeggni akuzilleghllagmegteggun 
\f2\i kiimsighlleqniluki
\f0\i0  yughalleteng piiqiit. \'91In their way of thinking they maintain that through their many and loud words He will 
\f2\i answer
\f0\i0  their prayers.\'92 (Matthew 6.7)	answer												to reply; to answer		PE ki(C)u-				kimsigh-	kxmsigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kiingighte-	r73b5ns-	thaw out food		maklagmeng kiingighsighaqukut kumlataghnaluta \'91we are thawing out bearded seal meat so that we can eat it partly frozen\'92; kiingighsighaq entaqun kingightaa, aavgughyaghqaaghtuq \'91maybe the meat is thawed up enough, it is ready to be cut up\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  kiik													to thaw out food		< kiik-?-		CK A & W 39		kingighte-	kxngighte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kiingngwaag- 	r73]16u-	tag (in play)		kiingngwaagaa \'91he tagged her\'92; kiingngwaagutut \'91they played tag\'92													to tag (in play)						kingngwag- 	kxngngwxg- 	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1187 \u1100 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 -\
kiingngwaak	r73]16r	game of tag		Teghigniqutukut 
\f2\i kiingngwaagmeng
\f0\i0 . \'91We had a lot of fun playing 
\f2\i tag
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 159)	tag (game of ~)												game of tag						kingngwak	kxngngwxk	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1187 \u1100 \u1265 \u257 \u1082 \
kiipeklak	r7gsrk]zr	freckle		kiipeklagtuuq \'91he has lots of freckles\'92													freckle		< kiik-?				kipeklak	kxpeklak	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
kiiq	r72	space between things		kiighit \'91the spaces between them\'92	interstices												space between things; interstices		PE 0ki9a3-				kiq	kxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1179 \
kiiste-	r7cns-	red-hot (make ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  naniq kiistekaq \'91red-hot seal-oil lamp\'92	burn												to make red-hot; to burn				CK Rub 213		kiste-	kxste-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Kiitek	R7nsr	Koozata River on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Koozata River on St. Lawrence Is.						Kitek	Kxtek	\uc0\u1050 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
kiitigh-	r7ns4-	get a cut or wound		Iqulunga 
\f2\i kiitightunga
\f0\i0  saghumignemkun inemkun. \'91I fell down and 
\f2\i got a cut
\f0\i0  in my left iliac area.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 64)	wound (get a ~)	cut (get a ~)											to get a cut or wound		< kii-?-				kitigh-	kxtigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 -\
kiitmik	r7nv]br	low-bush cranberry			cranberry, low-bush	
\f2\i Vaccinium vitus-idaea											
\f0\i0 low-bush cranberry (Vaccinium vitus-idaea)		PE kit&i!				kitmik	kxtmik	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1082 \
kiive-	r7ds-	settle (food in stomach, child after crying, tub draining, sediment sinking, etc.)		kiivuq \'91it settled\'92 / qefliqelleghllaga kiiveghraagtuq \'91his fury is abating\'92; esleqelleghllaka kiivuq \'91my overly full feeling (in my stomach) is going away\'92; mesiilghutam pagulakek kiivesighlukek  kuuvaak \'91he waited for the resiue to settle on the bottom of the oil can and he poured the oil out\'92		abate							< kive-				to settle (food in stomach, child after crying, tub draining, sediment sinking, etc.); to abate		PE kiv0-				kive-	kxve-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1074 \u1099 -\
kiivneq	r7dys2	sediment		kiivnegha siipluku allakaan egtaa \'91he separated out the sediment and threw it out\'92; melghutak kiivnengeghhlagumalghiik \'91the water jug has a lot of sediment in the bottom\'92													sediment		< kiive-neq\super 2		\nosupersub CK A & W 39		kivneq	kxvneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1074 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
kiivnigh-	r7dyb4-	slush (there is ~ snow in the sea water impeding boat travel)		ellmaaragmi qanigllugughhneghminigu meq kiivnighllagughtaquq \'91when the wind is calm and it gets really snowy, snow builds up in the ocean\'92													for there to be slush snow in the sea water impeding boat travel		< kiivneq-ligh-		CK A & W 39		kivnigh-	kxvnigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1074 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kiivnin	r7dyby	slush snow in sea water impeding boat travel and sometimes sinking  below the surface or even to the shallow bottom near the shore 		
\f2\i see item 29 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												slush snow in sea water impeding boat travel and sometimes sinking  below the surface or even to the shallow bottom near the shore 		< kiivneq-i\super 2\nosupersub -(u)n				kivnin	kxvnin	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1074 \u1085 \u1080 \u1085 \
Kiiwaaghek	R7164sr	Kewagek Cr. on St. Lawrence Is., emptying into Niyrakpak Lagoon		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kewagek Cr. on St. Lawrence Is., emptying into Niyrakpak Lagoon						Kiwaghek	Kxwxghek	\uc0\u1050 \u1251 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1099 \u1082 \
kiiwek	r71sr			
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  kiikw, 
\f2\i of which this is the dual which is used for a single river													
\f0\i0 river						kiwek	kxwek	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1265 \u1099 \u1082 \
kiiwhtaq	r71[nf2	dolly varden			
\f2\i Salvelinus malma												
\f0\i0 dolly varden trout 
\f2\i (Salvelinus malma)		
\f0\i0 < kiikw-taq\super 2				\nosupersub kiwhtaq	kxwhtaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1265 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kiiwna	r71yf	in (one further ~)		
\f2\i base: 
\f0\i0 kiw-; 
\f2\i restricted demonstrative pronoun; absolutive/relative plural pronoun:
\f0\i0  kiiwhkut \'91those in there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative:
\f0\i0  kiiwyuq \'91you, in there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: 
\f0\i0 teskiwna 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  eskiwna \'91that one in there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  kiwani \'91in there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb: 
\f0\i0 kiwavek \'91to in there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb:
\f0\i0  kiiggun 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kiiwhun \'91through in there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb: 
\f0\i0 kiiwhken \'91from in there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectonal:
\f0\i0  kiwa \'91there (in there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb:
\f0\i0  teskiwani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  eskiwani \'91there, in there\'92; kiwatmun \'91toward the northeast east\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91further in\'92	northeast (one toward the ~)	Savoonga (one toward ~ from Gambell)								far end (one at ~)			that one further in; that one toward the northeast; that one toward Savoonga from Gambell; one at far end		PE dem. kiv-				kiwna	kxwna	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1265 \u1085 \u1072 \
kiiyeghwaq	r7qs41f2	brook			stream												brook; stream	hext7\\ hjlybr	< kiikw-?		CK V &E 39, CK		kiyeghwaq	kxyeghwaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1251 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
kiksag-	rbrczu-	anchor with a spike or similar thing		qikmiq taghaghmeng uyaatalek, aghnaghaam nuqneqanga angalkesan nunakun nekregmeng kiksagaa \'91the girl was holding a dog on a leash and when it tried to get away she anchored to the ground with a cargo hook\'92													to anchor with a spike or similar thing				Akiingqwaghneghet 112		kiksag-	kiksag-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 -\
kiksak	rbrczr	ice creeper		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  iksaak; 
\f2\i worn on sole of boot to prevent slipping	
\f0\i0 creeper (ice~)								should this be keksak? - no				ice creeper		PE k0kya! or k0kya3				kiksak	kiksak	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
kilgaa	rbku6	tundra		
\f2\i when inflecting, this word acts as the 3s-s possessed form of  
\f0\i0 kilgaq*,
\f2\i  thus with non-absolutive endings in 
\f0\i0 n
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 (
\f2\i rather than 
\f0\i0 m): kilgaan aghnaa 'woman of the wilds' (
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 'woman of its \'93kilgaq\'94'); kilgaanun \'91to the wilderness\'92; (
\f2\i see also 
\f0\i0 aywaa, kellii, 
\f2\i and 
\f0\i0 uughqa)	wilderness	uninhabited area											tundra; wilderness; uninhabited area; the wilderness		PY kil!aq			; > kilgaamiqe-, kilgaaqu-	kilga	kilgx	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u257 \
kilgaamiqe-	rbku6vb2s-	wild (become a person living ~ in the wilderness)		
\f2\i especially of a small child who, according to stories, becomes lost in the wilderness and lives wild there									
\f0\i0 also given as \'93to be a toddler\'94				to become a person living wild in the wilderness		< kilgaa-?-				kilgamiqe-	kilgxmiqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u257 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kilgaanigh-	rbku6yb4-	become detatched		ighunga ayemluni kilgaanighwaaghumalghii \'91its leg snapped and it is completely detatched\'92; sayughqusiq kilgaaniimalghii \'91the starter cord became detatched\'92													to become detached		< kilgaa-?		CK A & W 39		kilganigh-	kilgxnigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u257 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kilgaantaq	rbku6ynf2	small islands that are far from mainland		Taatgem kilgaantaani manigtukut \'91we gathered eggs at the small islands near Tatek\'92; tekeghaq taawa kilgaantalguftuq \'91there is an island right off the point\'92													small islands that are far from mainland		< kilgaa-nte-aq		CK A & W 39		kilgantaq	kilgxntaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u257 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kilgaantaq	rbku6nf2	island, small, a little ways offshore															small island a little ways offshore		< kilgaa-nte-aq		VK		kilgantaq	kilgxntaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kilgaaqu-	rbku62e-	run a long distance			distance (run a long ~)												to run a long distance		< kilgaa-?-				kilgaqu-	kilgxqu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 -\
kiligh-	rbkb4-	cut or get cut		
\f2\i especially on the hand or wrist;
\f0\i0  kilightuq \'91he cut himself or got cut\'92; kilighaa \'91he cut her or it (body part)\'92 / kilightunga iiggemkun \'91I cut my hand\'92; kililleq \'91a wound\'92 I \'91the act of getting cut\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  kii	wound												to cut; to get cut; to wound		PE kili3-				kiligh-	kiligh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kiliq	rbkb2	wound		
\f2\i direct nominalization of 
\f0\i0 kiligh-	cut												wound; cut						kiliq	kiliq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
kimaawi-	rbv61b-	delayed (be ~)		kimaawiiq \'91he is taking too long\'92 / kimaawistaa  \'91he or it is delaying her, slowing her down\'92	slowly (act too ~)	long (take too ~)											to be delayed; to act too slowly (as because of factors beyond one's control); to take too long	pflth;bdfncz	from Chukchi kemawek \'91prevent, hinder\'92	14	CK V & E 137 (Russ voc)	kimaawingaq	kimawi-	kimxwi-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1084 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\
kimaawinaq	rbv61byf2	delay (something that ~s one)															something that delays one)		< kimaawi-naq				kimawinaq	kimxwinaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1084 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
Kimaawitem Naayvaa	Rbv61bnsv Y6qd6	Niyrakpak Lake (smaller lake just east along coast from ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Niyrakpak (Naayvaghpak) Lake (smaller lake just east along coast from ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		< kimaawi-(u)n-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + naayvaq-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxn	Kimawitem Nayva	Kimxwitem Nxyvx	\uc0\u1050 \u1080 \u1084 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1084  \u1053 \u257 \u1253 \u1074 \u257 \
kina	rbyf	who?		
\f2\i pronoun;
\f0\i0  kinkut \'91who\sub pl\nosupersub ?\'92; kinkuk \'91who\sub 2\nosupersub ?\'92; kitum \'91who?\'92 
\f2\i (relative singular);
\f0\i0  kitumun \'91to whom?\'92 
\f2\i (terminalis singular); 
\f0\i0 kina alngunak \'91anyone at random, whoever, whosoever\'92; kina alla alngunak \'91anyone else\'92; kinganguzin? \'91who are you?\'92; kinkungutsi? \'91who are you\sub pl\nosupersub ?\'92; 
\f2\i with 3rd person endings the expanded verbal bases 
\f0\i0 kinangaa- 
\f2\i (underlyingly
\f0\i0  kinangau-) 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  kinkungaa- 
\f2\i (underlyingly
\f0\i0  kinangau-) 
\f2\i are used rather than
\f0\i0  *kinangu- 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  *kinkungu-; 
\f2\i thus: 
\f0\i0 kinangaawa? who is it?; kinkungaawat? who are they?	someone												who?
\f2\i  (singular)
\f0\i0 ; someone
\f2\i  (when used in a non-interrogative context);		
\f0\i0 PE ki(na)				kina	kina	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \
kinegh-	rbys4-	dry		kineghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kiinghaagaa \'91it dried\'92 / kineghtaa \'91it (heat, sun) dried it\'92; kinengllaghaa \'91he dried it (hung it up to dry, put it in a clothes dryer, etc.)\'92; kiinghumaaq \'91it is dry\'92													to dry		PE kin03-				kinegh-	kinegh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 -\
kineghtaq	rbys5nf2	dried meat or fish															dried meat; dried fish		PY kin03taq (under PE kin03-); < kinegh-te\super 1\nosupersub -aq				kineghtaq	kineghtaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
kinengyugnaghqe-	rbys3]/uyf52s-	place clothing or other things where they cam dry		kaamgek qulqesaallukek kinengyugnaghqaak \'91she placed the skin boots in an elevated area so they can dry easily\'92; aatkat saaghqughluki kinengyugnaghqiit, kineragkiighesqelluki \'91she spread the clothes so that they could dry up fast\'92													to place clothing or other things where they can dry		< kinegh-yug-nagh-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub - (?)		CK A & W 40		kinengyugnaghqe-	kinengyugnaghqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b kingi-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rb3b-\super \'a1	\nosupersub babyish (act ~ly (of a child whose mother is expecting))		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  kingu; 
\f2\i behavior observed in small children													
\f0\i0 to act babyishly (of a child whose mother is expecting)						kingi-1	kingi-1	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub kingi-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rb3b-\super \'99	\nosupersub carcass eaten by maggots (have part of a sea mammal ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  kingu													to have part of a sea mammal carcass eaten by maggots		< kinguk-i\super 2\nosupersub -				kingi-2	kingi-2	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 -\super 2\
\nosupersub kingin	rb3by	youngest child			child, youngest								looks good				youngest child	gjcktlybq ht,tyjr. vkflibq ht,tyjr	< kingi-(u)n		Rub. 212		kingin	kingin	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1085 \
kingu	rb3e	rear		
\f2\i opposite of 
\f0\i0 sivu; kingunga \'91its rear, behind it\'92; kingungani \'91after it\'92	back	time after								after (time ~)			rear; back; time after		PE ki&u		CK V & E 116 (kingungani)	; > kinguliq, kingulilek, kingute-, kinguvaghhaaneng, kinguvaqwaaqun, kinguyak, kinguwaaq	kingu	kingu	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \
kinguk	rb3er	worm		Qateghyiighaat 
\f2\i kingugmeng
\f0\i0  neghegkayuget. \'91Little birds eat 
\f2\i worms
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 80)	maggot	sand mason (a type of worm)								krill			worm; maggot; \'93sand mason\'94; krill		PE ki&u!				kinguk	kinguk	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1082 \
kingulighpigaq	rb3ekb5gbuf2	last (the very ~ one)															the very last one		PE ki&ul(l)i3 (under ki&u-); < kingu-lighpigaq				kingulighpigaq	kingulighpigaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
kinguliighaq	rb3ek74f2	younger generation															younger generation		< kinguliq-?-				kingulighaq	kingulxghaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kingulilek	rb3ekbksr	hind leg of quadruped			leg, hind, of quadruped	quadruped\'92s hind leg											hind leg of quadruped		< kingu-liq-lek				kingulilek	kingulilek	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
kinguliq*	rb3ekb2	descendant															descendant		PE ki&ul(l)i3 (under ki&u-); < kingu-liq				kinguliq*	kinguliq*	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
kingumegta	rb3evs[nf	last whale migrating in a particular season															last whale migrating in a particular season		< kingu-?-(s)ta		VK\'92s notes		kingumegta	kingumegta	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \
kingumegte-	rb3evs[ns-	last group of whales traveling in the season (to be ~)		uupenghami nani naasaghami kingumeggniiqaat \'91they estimated when the last group of whales  would pass in the spring\'92; aangepaaghrugpaghqunguniiqaat kingumegneghmini \'91they say the last group of whales are usually really big ones\'92													to be the last group of whales traveling in the season		< kingu-?-		CK A & W 40		kingumegte-	kingumegte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kingumun	rb3evey	future (in the ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle	
\f0\i0 from now on												in the future; from now on	d lfkmytqitv. dghtlm	< kingu-
\f2\i terminalis		
\f0\i0 CK V & E 125		kingumun	kingumun	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
kinguneq	rb3eys2	descendant															descendant		PE ki&un03 (under ki&u-); < kingu-neq\super 2				\nosupersub kinguneq	kinguneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
kingupak	rb3egfr	tube of \'93sand mason\'94 (a type of worm)		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 tube of \'93sand mason\'94 (a type of worm)		< kinguk-?				kingupak	kingupak	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
kingute-	rb3ens-	late (be ~)		kingutaa \'91he is late\'92 
\f2\i (impersonal subject)
\f0\i0  / kingutaanga \'91I am late\'92													to be late	jncnfnm	< kingu-?-		CK V & E 137 (Russ voc)		kingute-	kingute-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kinguvaghhaaneng	rb3edf56ys3	unexpectedly		
\f2\i particle; specifically, 
\f0\i0 when something is done by one whom you had least expected to do it													unexpectedly		< kingu-vaq-ghhaq-
\f2\i ablative modalis				
\f0\i0 kinguvaghhaneng	kinguvaghhxneng	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \
kinguvaqwaaqun	rb3edf2162ey	later on		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 later on		< kingu-vaq-?-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 kinguvaqwaqun	kinguvaqwxqun	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
kinguyak	rb3ezr	stern of boat															stern of boat		< kingu-yak				kinguyak	kinguyak	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1103 \u1082 \
kingwaaq	rb3162	float (third of three ~s of whaling gear)															third of three floats of whaling gear		< kingu-?				kingwaq	kingwxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
kinkut	rbyren			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  kina													who? 
\f2\i (plural)						
\f0\i0 kinkut	kinkut	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \
kipiinaghmun	rbg7yf4vey	opposite direction (continuously in the ~)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 continuously in the opposite direction		< kipu-(ng)inaq-
\f2\i terminalis				
\f0\i0 kipinaghmun	kipxnaghmun	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
kipu-	rbge-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kipiinaghmun, kipughmun, kipullegmun, kipullegte-															PE kiput-				kipu-	kipu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1087 \u1091 -\
kipughmun	rbge4vey	opposite direction		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 the opposite direction		< kipu-
\f2\i terminalis				
\f0\i0 kipughmun	kipughmun	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
kipullegmun	rbgek]suvey	opposite direction (in the ~)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Ii, quyaknaqniiqaa aghnaghaam piyaqminigu, 
\f2\i tengvimun
\f0\i0 , kipullegmun, naangan piyaqminigu. \'91The girl thought she (her mother) would be happy, but her mother\'92s reaction was 
\f2\i just the opposite
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:246)													in the opposite direction		< kipu-?-
\f2\i terminalis				
\f0\i0 kipullegmun	kipullegmun	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1087 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
kipullegte-	rbgek]s[ns-	alternate		kipullegtaa \'91he passed her as  she was going in one direction and he coming from the other direction\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he took her place or his turn right after her\'92 / kipullgutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  passed and missed each other\'92; aghnaghaat kipullgutaqluteng qepghaghtut \'91the girls worked in shifts, alternating with each other (taking turns)\'92	pass (and miss) coming from the opposite direction	turns (take ~)											to alternate; to pass (and miss) coming from the opposite direction; to take turns		PE kipu@0!- (under PE kiput-); < kipu-?-				kipullegte-	kipullegte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1087 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kir'pisa	rbhgbcz	tea (Russian brick ~)		
\f2\i the dry tea came in the form of bricks or blocks  with scoring for dividing it (as with certain chocolate bars nowadays), and was used as currency as well as for making the beverage in former times; the
\f0\i0  "r" 
\f2\i in this word is voiced (indicated with the apostrophe); see Boaz 1913:450, and also the discussion of this word in Jacobson2001:40.	
\f0\i0 brick tea, Russian												Russian brick tea		from Russian rbhgbx (kirpich) \'91brick\'92, probably via Koryak kirpic, kerpec \'91brick tea\'92 (perhaps also in Chukchi ?)	15			kir'pisa	kir'pisa	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1088 \u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \
kirwaayulga	rbh16/kuf	bag with shoulder strap															bag with shoulder strap		from Chukchi kirwec \'92elbow\'92 and suffix -yol!0n \'91thing or place for\'92		CK Rub 213		kirwayulga	kirwxyulga	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1088 \u1265 \u257 \u1102 \u1083 \u1075 \u1072 \
kisaan	rbc9y	rock weight tied hanging from and holding down the walrus hide roofing of the traditional dome-shaped house															rock weight tied hanging from and holding down the walrus hide roofing of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		PE kica3 (under PE kit-) and postbase -(u)n				kisan	kisxn	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \
Kisii	Rbc7	Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. (projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus toward east end of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus toward east end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.						Kisi	Kisx	\uc0\u1050 \u1080 \u1089 \u1251 \
Kisiim Naayghaa	Rbc7v Y6q46	hill with VABM \'93White\'94 on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 hill with VABM \'93White\'94 on St. Lawrence Is.		< kisiiq-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + naayghaq-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxn	Kisim Naygha	Kisxm Nxyghx	\uc0\u1050 \u1080 \u1089 \u1251 \u1084  \u1053 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u257 \
Kitayeghmii	Rbnfqs4vb	Chinese person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E); 
\f0\i0 Kitayeghmiit \'91Chinese people\'92													Chinese person	Rbnfqws	from Russian rbnftw (kitaets) with Yupik postbase -mii		CK V & E 76		Kitayeghmi	Kitayeghmx	\uc0\u1050 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \

\f1\b kiteghqe-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rbns52s-\'a1	overcook (meat)		ugket kiteghqepagyaaghii igunakesi \'91keep an eye on the meat, don\'92t let them over cook, serve them\'92; kiteghqegkameng ilangi neghyugigatut \'91some people don\'92t like to eat overcooked food\'92													to overcook (meat)				CK A & W 40		kiteghqe-1	kiteghqe-1	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub kiteghqe-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rbns52s-\'99	tightly pull the rope on a pulley		iighsuutet kiteghqiteki \'91tighten the pulley ropes\'92; kiteghqelluki wiin nuqneghteki \'91hold the ropes on the pulley tight\'92													to tightly pull the rope on a pulley				CK A & W 40		kiteghqe-2	kiteghqe-2	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub kiti	rbnb	cat															cat		from English \'91kitty\'92	SLI			kiti	kiti	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1080 \
kitugh-	rbne4-	pass		kitughaa \'91he went past it or her\'92 /	go by	surpass											to pass; to go by; to surpass						kitugh-	kitugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kitum	rbnev			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 kina													who?
\f2\i  (relative case)						
\f0\i0 kitum	kitum	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \
kivaagh-	rbd64-	calm down		qiyalleghllagkek kivaaghtuk \'91his crying has lessened\'92; eslallugllak kivaaghtuq \'91the heavy rain has slackened\'92	lessen	abate								slacken			to calm down; to lessen; to abate; to slacken		< kive-?-				kivagh-	kivxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1074 \u257 \u1271 -\
kive-	rbds-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kivaagh-, kiive-, kiivnigh-, kiivnin															PE kiv0-				kive-	kive-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 -\
Kiwatangaghmii(t)	Rb1fnf3f4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< kiwa(ni)-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -
\f2\i possessed
\f0\i0 -mii			xxxt	Kiwatangaghmi(t)	Kiwatangaghmx(t)	\uc0\u1050 \u1080 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
kiwavaq	rb1fdf2	east-northeast															east-northeast		< kiwa(ni)-vaq		SLI Cur. Man. 19		kiwavaq	kiwavaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1265 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
kiyaghfik	rbz5abr	house			dwelling	camp							looks good				house; dwelling; camp	;bkbot.cnjq,bot	< kiyaghte-vik		Rub. 217		kiyaghfik	kiyaghfik	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1103 \u1203 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \
kiyaghlliqe-	rbz5k]b2s-	contain something		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 have something or somebody	something or somebody (have or contain ~)							check this				to contain something; to have something or somebody	cjlth;fnm xnj-kb,j.bvtnm rjuj. xnj kb,j	< kiyaghte-?-		Rub. 216		kiyaghlliqe-	kiyaghlliqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1103 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b kiyaghneq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rbz4ys2\super \'a1	\nosupersub way of life			life (way of ~)	God							Rub. gives the glosses \'91character\'92 and \'91personality\'92; check				way of life; God		< kiyaghte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub kiyaghneq1	kiyaghneq1	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1103 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 1\
kiyaghsigate-	rbz5cbufns-	busy (always be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); literally: 
\f0\i0 \'91to never (just) be\'92	idle (never be ~)								check				to always be busy; to never be idle	yt cbltnm ,tp ltkf	< kiyaghte-(ng)igate-		Rub. 216		kiyaghsigate-	kiyaghsigate-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1103 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kiyaghtaalleghqaq	rbz5n6k]s52f2	everything necessary for living		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; what would kiyaghtaalleq be?				everything necessary for living	dct ytj,[jlbvjt lkz ;bpyb	< kiyaghte-?-lleq-kaq		Rub. 217		kiyaghtalleghqaq	kiyaghtxlleghqaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
kiyaghte-	rbz5ns-	be		kiyaghtuq \'91it lives\'92 / naten kiyaghtaqsin? \'91how are you?\'92; pinitun kiyaghtaqunga \'91I\'92m doing fine\'92; kiyaghtaqunga Sivuqami \'91I live on St. Lawrence Island (or in Gambell)\'92	reside	live								alive (be ~)			to be; to reside; to live; to be alive	;bdtn	PY-S kiya3- (?)		CK V & E 138 (Russ voc)	kiyaghneq, Kiyaghneq, kiyaghute-	kiyaghte-	kiyaghte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kiyaghun	rbz4ey	pupil of eye															pupil of eye		PY-S kiya3-; note Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik kiaXt0- \'91to look around\'92				kiyaghun	kiyaghun	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
kiyaghute-	rbz4ens-	support		kiyaghutaa \'91he is supporting her\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is living by it\'92 /	provide for	live by (it)							Rub. has gloss \'91to treat someone in a certain way\'92; check				to support; to provide for; to live by (it)		< kiyaghte-(u)te-				kiyaghute-	kiyaghute-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Kiyalighaq	Rbzkb4f2	Kialegak (site on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i old village site on Southeast Cape of St. Lawrence Island; its inhabitants, all except one of whom died in the famine of 1878-1879, are said to have spoken a language different from the present language of the island; no one knows exactly what their language was, or whether it was a form of Yupik or another language;
\f0\i0  = Kigalighaq; 
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kialegak						Kiyalighaq	Kiyalighaq	\uc0\u1050 \u1080 \u1103 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kiyang	rbz3	mostly		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  Amighqwaaq 
\f2\i kiyang
\f0\i0  atkukaqsaqangat, sukilpaq, alpa, metghaq, kang'ghwaagmengllu atkukayuguyaghpetut. \'91Parkas were 
\f2\i usually
\f0\i0  of bird skin; crested aukle, murre, eider, and oldsquaw were used in parkas.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:104); Tawanillu Pinaghvigmi 
\f2\i kiyang
\f0\i0  matum qiighqam qawaaga kaatquutkayuk. \'91In the same month of June 
\f2\i mostly
\f0\i0  this island\'92s bird population came back.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:136); 
\f2\i Kiyang
\f0\i0  quyngimetutemneng nallukegkegka sangwaa ilanga, nemun tagilqungigalnguunga 
\f2\i kiyang
\f0\i0  quyngimetkayugulghiinga qayughllak. \'91I was unaware of some things going on because I was 
\f2\i usually
\f0\i0  with the reindeer. I didn\'92t go home since I spent 
\f2\i most of the time
\f0\i0  with the reindeer.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:64)	usually												mostly; usually		from Chukchi ?	x			kiyang	kiyang	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1103 \u1187 \
kiyaqurragh-	rbz2eif4-	loaf		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 do nothing												to loaf; to do nothing	,tpltkmybxfnm	< kiyaghte-?		CK V & E 137; Rub 216		kiyaqurragh-	kiyaqurragh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1096 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kufi	reab	coffee															coffee		from English \'91coffee\'92, or Russian rjat (kofe) \'91coffee\'92	SLI			kufi	kufi	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1092 \u1080 \
kugaaq, kuwaaq	reu62> re162	common murre			murre, common	
\f2\i Uria aalge											
\f0\i0 common murre (Uria aalge)						kugaq, kuwaq	kugxq, kuwxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 . \u1082 \u1091 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
kugeq	reus2	brother of female		kuuggha \'91her brother\'92; kuugqa, kuughqa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kuugh\'92qa \'91my brother\'92; Jesus-em pikaa,
\f2\i  "Kuugghen
\f0\i0  makellequq unguvalleghmun." \'91Jesus said to her, \'93Your 
\f2\i brother
\f0\i0  will be raised to life.\'94\'92 (John 11.23)													brother of female						kugeq	kugeq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1179 \
kuguutitke-	reu8nbnrs-	not want to leave (him) feeling one's help or company is needed		kuguutitkaa \'91he doesn't want to leave her\'92 / Iwerngaqun 
\f2\i kuguutitkeghngaaghmegtegnegu
\f0\i0  unitkaak. \'91However they left him behind even though they
\f2\i  didn\'92t want to leave him.
\f0\i0 \'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:30)		leave (not want to ~ another feeling one's help or company is needed							is there a more basic word than this?				to not want to leave (him) feeling one's help or company is needed						kugutitke-	kugxtitke-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1080 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\

\f1\b kukawa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rerf1f\super s	\nosupersub tripod		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 kukawet,
\f2\i  for one tripod													
\f0\i0 tripod		from Chukchi kuke&0 (stem, kuke-) \'91pot\'92 and a suffix		CK Rub 221		kukawae	kukawae	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1099 \
kukeghqugh-	rers52e4-	pain (have a throbbing ~)			throbbing pain (have a ~)								Rub. gives a noun kukegqu \'91pulsation, beating of the heart\'92; check				to have a throbbing pain						kukeghqugh-	kukeghqugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kukegte-	rers[ns-	shine light		kukegtaa \'91he shined light on it\'92, \'91ignited it\'92 /	ignite												to shine light; to ignite		PE kuk0y- 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  kuku!-				kukegte-	kukegte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kuketun	rersney	brightly		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 very brightly		< kukegte-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 kuketun	kuketun	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
kukguuy	rer[8q	oh!		
\f2\i particle; an exclamation of surprise, fear, wonder or dismay at having undergone an experience;
\f0\i0  = kakuuy, kuy, kuukguuy													oh!		from Chukchi ?	x			kukguy	kukgxy	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1093 \u1263 \u1253 \
kukik	rerbr			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kukikrak, kukingquq															PE kuki!				kukik	kukik	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1082 \
kukikrak	rerbrifr	grapnel hook			treble hook	hook, grapnel or treble											grapnel hook; treble hook		< kukik-krak				kukikrak	kukikrak	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \

\f1\b kukilnga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rerbk3f\super s	\nosupersub chain with hook at end for hanging a pot over a seal oil lamp		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 kukilnget,
\f2\i  for one chain; the hook itself is termed 
\f0\i0 aremaataq													chain with hook
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 at end for hanging a pot over a seal oil lamp		from Chukchi kukil!0n or Koryak kukil&0n \'91chain for hanging pot over fire\'92				kukilngae	kukilngae	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
kukingquq	rerb32e2	ivory hook		angalqatama kukingqghwi unniistaapiguut \'91the hooks on my hooked device are too flexible\'92	hook on hooked device, 
\f2\i angalqataq, 
\f0\i0 for seals or on fishing lure												ivory hook; hook on hooked device, 
\f2\i angalqataq, 
\f0\i0 for seals; hook on fishing lure		< kukik-quq		CK A & W 41 on 2nd gloss		kukingquq	kukingquq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \

\f1\b kukisa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rerbcf\super s	\nosupersub cookie		kukiset \'91cookies\'92													cookie		from English \'91cookie\'92	SLI			kukisae	kukisae	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1089 \u1072 \u1099 \
kukragniite-	rerifuy7ns-	easily accomplished (be ~)		kukragniituq \'91it is easily done\'92 / kukragniilnguq \'91something that is easily done\'92													to be easily accomplished; to not be hard to do		< kukrak-nagh-(ng)ite-				kukragnite-	kukragnxte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kukrak	rerifr	clumsy, slow to learn person															person who is clumsy and slow to learn or perform		PE kuk9a!-			> kukragniite-, kukriqe-	kukrak	kukrak	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
kukriqe-	rerib2s-	difficult time (have a ~)		kukriquq \'91he is having a hard time\'92 / kukriqutkaa \'91he is having a hard time with it\'92	hard time (have a ~)												to have a difficult time		< kukrak-liqe-				kukriqe-	kukriqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kukugugg,	rereue[	oh good!		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 = kwugg													oh good!				CK Rub 221 CK		kukugugg	kukugugg	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1093 \
Kukulegtuuk	Rereks[n8r	Kookooliktuuk River on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kookooliktuuk River on St. Lawrence Is.		< kukulek-?				Kukulegtuk	Kukulegtxk	\uc0\u1050 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1263 \u1082 \
Kukulek	Rereksr	Kookoolik (site of former village on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i site of former village on St. Lawrence Is.; see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kookoolik		< ?-lek				Kukulek	Kukulek	\uc0\u1050 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \

\f1\b Kukulget\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Rerekusn\super 1	\nosupersub Old Chaplino in Chukotka (hilly area by Itxat R. west of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Itxat R. west of Old Chaplino in Chukotka (hilly area by ~)												hilly area by Itxat R. west of Old Chaplino in Chukotka				CK		Kukulget1	Kukulget1	\uc0\u1050 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \u1265 \

\f1\b Kukulget\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Rerekusn\super \'99	\nosupersub Kookooligat Mountains on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kookooligat Mountains on St. Lawrence Is.		< kukulek-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Kukulget2	Kukulget2	\uc0\u1050 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 2\
kukumtugh-	rerevne4-	try to get at something before others do or before it is too late		kukumtughtuq \'91he is trying to get at something first\'92 / kukumtuutkaa \'91he is trying to get at it first\'92													to try to get at something before others do or before it is too late; to fear being left out or deprived of one's chance						kukumtugh-	kukumtugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kukumyalqi-	rerevmzk]2b-	whistle		kukumyalqiiq \'91he is whistling\'92 / kukumyalqitaa \'91he is whistling at her or to her\'92													to whistle		PY kukumya3-				kukumyalqi-	kukumyalqi-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 -\
kukupagaghaq	reregfuf4f2	ribbon seal, young			seal (young ribbon ~)	
\f2\i Phoca fasciata 
\f0\i0 (ribbon seal) young											young ribbon seal
\f2\i  (Phoca fasciata)		
\f0\i0 < kukupak-aghaq				kukupagaghaq	kukupagaghaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kukupak	reregfr	ribbon seal female		Qazigyat ayumiqunaqutnginaq taapngigsimaaqegkangi. 
\f2\i Kukupaget
\f0\i0  unglleneghtungitneng seghleqaqiit. \'91After a year spotted seal (skin-boots) would soak through. To them 
\f2\i ribbon seal
\f0\i0  (skins) were bad as they shrank too much.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)	seal (ribbon ~ female)	
\f2\i Phoca fasciata											
\f0\i0 female ribbon seal
\f2\i  (Phoca fasciata)		
\f0\i0 PE kuku!				kukupak	kukupak	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
kulngagh-	rek3f4-	slack (go ~)		kulngaghtuq \'91it sagged\'92 / kulngaghtaa \'91he slackened it\'92	go slack	sag											to go slack; to sag						kulngagh-	kulngagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kulngallaagte-	rek3fk]9[ns-	wither		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf.
\f0\i0  kulngagh-	fade								check				to wither; to fade	dzyenm. ,ktryenm gj rfrjq-kb,j ghbxbyt			Rub. 222		kulngallagte-	kulngallxgte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kulusim qawaaga	rek/cbv 2f16uf	Ross\'92 gull		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91iceberg\'92s bird\'92	gull (Ross\'92 ~)	
\f2\i Rhodostethia rosea											
\f0\i0 Ross' gull (Rhodostethia rosea)		< kulusiq-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + qawaak-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxq	kulusim qawaga	kulusim qawxga	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1089 \u1080 \u1084  \u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 \u1072 \
kulusiq	rek/cb2	chunk of ice in sea, seen early in season, blue in color, rounded by water action, arises from old pack ice		
\f2\i also used in the dual dual, 
\f0\i0 kulusik, 
\f2\i for one, smaller, chunk; see items 30-31 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	iceberg (though not from a glacier)	sea ice type											chunk of ice in sea, seen early in season, blue in color, rounded by water action, arises from old pack ice; iceberg (though not from glacier)						kulusiq	kulusiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
Kulusiq	Rek/cb2	Kolyuchin in Chukotka (well northwest along Arctic coast from main Yupik area)		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kolyuchin in Chukotka (well northwest along Arctic coast from main Yupik area)		< kulusiq				Kulusiq	Kulusiq	\uc0\u1050 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kumaagte-	rev6[ns-	infested with lice (be ~)		kumaagtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kumaagtaa \'91he is infested with lice\'92 /	ice-infested												to be infested with lice		< kumak-?-				kumagte-	kumxgte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kumagh-	revf4-	fire (be on ~)		kumaghtuq \'91it got lit\'92 / kumaghtaa \'91he lit it\'92; kumaghughaquq \'91it is really burning\'92	lit (be ~)	ignite											to be on fire; to be lit; to ignite		PE 0kuma- (under PE 0k0-\super 1\nosupersub )				kumagh-	kumagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kumaghraasiq	revf4h6cb2	alcohol primer for kerosene pressure device		naakek kumaghraasik gaaghnaqunga \'91where is the alcohol primer, I am going to cook!\'92													alcohol primer for kerosene pressure device		< kumagh-ragh-(u)siq		CK A & W 41		kumaghrasiq	kumaghrxsiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kumaghugh-	revf4e4-	grow (of flame)															to grow (of flame)		< kumagh-ugh-		VK\'92s notes		kumaghugh-	kumaghugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kumak	revfr	louse															louse		PE kuma!			> kumaagte-, kumakigh-	kumak	kumak	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \
kumakigh-	revfrb4-	delouse		kumakightuq \'91he deloused himself\'92; kumakighaa \'91he deloused her\'92 /													to delouse		PY kumaki3- (under PE kuma!); < kumak-?-igh-				kumakigh-	kumakigh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1271 -\
kumeg-	revsu-	scratch to relieve an itch		kumegtuq \'91he scratched himself\'92; kuumgaa \'91he scratched her or it\'92 /													to scratch to relieve an itch		PE kum0!-			> kumegagh-, kumekereqagh-, kumgayaaq, kuumgun. kuumgutet	kumeg-	kumeg-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1075 -\
kumegagh-	revsuf4-	rake		kumegaghtuq \'91he raked\'92; kumegaghaa \'91he raked it\'92 / kumegaasit \'91rake\'92													to rake		< kumeg-?-				kumegagh-	kumegagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kumekereqagh-	revsrshs2f4-	scratch lightly repeatedly															to scratch lightly repeatedly		< kumeg-?-				kumekereqagh-	kumekereqagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kumgayaaq	revuf92	striped thing															striped thing		< kumeg-?- (?)				kumgayaq	kumgayxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1075 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
kumi	revb	cold sore															cold sore						kumi	kumi	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \
kumk-	revr-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kumkelleghaq, kumkiili-; = kemk-															PE kumka3-				kumk-	kumk-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1082 -\
kumkelleghaq	revrsk]s4f2	food particle between teeth															food particle between teeth		< kumk-?-				kumkelleghaq	kumkelleghaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kumkiili-	revr7kb-	pick one's teeth		kumkiiliiq \'91he picked his teeth\'92 / = kemkiili-	remove food particle from between teeth												to pick one's teeth; to remove food particle from between teeth		PE kumka(C)ili- (under PE kumka3); < kumk-?-				kumkili-	kumkxli-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1082 \u1251 \u1083 \u1080 -\
kumkiilin	revr7kby	toothpick		= kumkiilisiq, kemkiilin													toothpick		< kumkiili-(u)n				kumkilin	kumkxlin	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1082 \u1251 \u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \
kumkiilisiq	revr7kbcb2	toothpick		= kumkiilin, kemkiilisiq													toothpick		< kumkiili-(u)siq				kumkilisiq	kumkxlisiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1082 \u1251 \u1083 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
kumkuyalqi-	revrezk]2b- 	whistle		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 = kukumyalqi-									check this; cf. kukumyalqi- \'91to whistle\'92, which is more consistent with the CAY and AAY forms, but this could be a variant (Rub. has it several times -- not just a typo!)				to whistle	cdbcntnm			Rub. 223		kumkuyalqi-	kumkuyalqi-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1082 \u1091 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 -\
kumla-	revkz-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kumlaaghqe-, kumlama-, kumlaneq, kumlaqugh-, kumlaregagh-, kumlasighvigek, kumlate-, kumlavik, kumlamiigh-															PY-S kumla-				kumla-	kumla-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 -\
kumlaaghqe-	revk952s-	freeze solid		kumlaaghquq \'91it froze solid\'92													to freeze solid		< kumla-?-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				kumlaghqe-	kumlxghqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kumlama-	revkzvf-	frozen (be ~)		kumlamaaq \'91it is frozen\'92 /													to be frozen		< kumla-ma-				kumlama-	kumlama-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1084 \u1072 -\
kumlamiigh-	revkfv74-	eat meat frozen		maklagmeng kumlamiighelta \'91lets eat bearded seal frozen\'92													to eat meat frozen		< kumla-?-		CK A & W 41 CK		kumlamigh-	kumlamxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1072 \u1084 \u1251 \u1271 -\
kumlamiigh-		eat frozen meat			frozen meat (eat ~)												to eat frozen meat				VK\'92s notes		kumlamigh-	kumlamxgh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1072 \u1084 \u1251 \u1271 -\
kumlaneq	revkzys2	frozen part			permafrost												frozen part; permafrost		< kumla-neq\super 2				\nosupersub kumlaneq	kumlaneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
kumlaqugh-	revkz2e4-	frostbitten (get ~)		Gginaqa 
\f2\i kumlaquumaa
\f0\i0 . \'91My face 
\f2\i is
\f0\i0  
\f2\i frostbitten
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 52); 
\f2\i Kumlaquumaanga
\f0\i0  ullungamkun. \'91 I got 
\f2\i frostbitton
\f0\i0  on my cheek.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 169)													to get frostbitten		< kumla-qugh-				kumlaqugh-	kumlaqugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kumlaregagh-	revkzhsuf4-	freeze (begin to ~)		kumlaregaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kumlaregaghaa \'91it began to freeze\'92 /													to begin to freeze		< kumla-?-				kumlaregagh-	kumlaregagh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kumlasighvik	revkzcb4dbr	freezer		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 kumlasighvigek
\f2\i , for one freezer	
\f0\i0 ice house												freezer; ice house		< kumla-sigh-vik; 				kumlasighvik	kumlasighvik	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
kumlate-	revkzns-	freeze		kumlatuq \'91it froze\'92; iiggenka kumlatut \'91my hands are cold\'92	cold (have ~ hands and/or feet (or other body part))												to freeze; to have cold hands and/or feet (or other body part)		< kumla-te\super \'a3\nosupersub -				kumlate-	kumlate-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Kumlavik	Revkzdbr	October		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time of cold\'92; 
\f2\i also given in various sources as
\f0\i0  August, August-September, September, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  September-October													October		< kumla-vik				Kumlavik	Kumlavik	\uc0\u1050 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
kumlii-	revk7-	cold (have one\'92s hands become extremely ~ and nearly frostbitten)		yuuk taana saapghangilnguq kumliingigatngwaaghtuq \'91that man doesn\'92t complain that his hands being cold\'92; kumliimaghmi ayviiguq \'91he butchered the walrus with his hands really cold\'92													to have one\'92s hands become extremely cold and nearly frostbitten		< kumla-?-		CK A & W 41		kumli-	kumlx-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1251 -\

\f1\b kumlu\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub revk/\super \'a1	\nosupersub thumb			bolt (of gun)												thumb; bolt (of gun)		PE kumlu			> kumlullguunaq, kumlulqugnak	kumlu1	kumlu1	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1102 1\

\f1\b kumlu\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub revk/\super \'99	\nosupersub five (the number ~ in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kumlu\super 1
\f2\i \nosupersub ; the entire jingle is:
\f0\i0  aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'	counting jingle (the number \'91five\'92 in a ~ or finger naming jingle for children)	jingle (the number \'91five\'92 in a counting or finger naming ~ for children)											the number five (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)						kumlu2	kumlu2	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1102 2\
kumlullguunaq	revk/k][8yf2	pipit			
\f2\i Anthus spp.												
\f0\i0 pipit (Anthus spp.)		< kumlu-?-				kumlullgunaq	kumlullgxnaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1263 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
kumlulqugnak	revk/k]2euyfr	arctic warbler		
\f2\i Kumlulqugnak
\f0\i0  nalugtuq napaqam nuvugakun. \'91A 
\f2\i warbler
\f0\i0  landed on top of a pole.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 82)	warbler, arctic	
\f2\i Phylloscopus borealis											
\f0\i0 arctic warbler 
\f2\i (Phylloscopus borealis)		
\f0\i0 < kumlu-?-				kumlulqugnak	kumlulqugnak	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
Kumlulquuyak	Revkek]28zr	Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. (projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus near west end of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus near west end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		< kumluq-?				Kumlulquyak	Kumlulqxyak	\uc0\u1050 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1263 \u1103 \u1082 \
kumyugte-	rev]/[ns-	gather, reducing in size, an opening of something flexible		kumyuglluni kukumyalqiiq \'91he puckered up his lips and whistled\'92; kalngagam paaynga kumyuglluku qilleghtugu \'91gather the opening of the bag and tie it\'92	pucker the lips												to gather, reducing in size, an opening of something flexible; to pucker the lips				CK A & W 41		kumyugte-	kumyugte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kunukaq	reyerf2	grass (kind of marsh ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan; exact identity undetermined													
\f0\i0 kind of marsh grass		PY kun(n)aq				kunukaq	kunukaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
kurgela	rehuskz	cheerful person		
\f2\i Chukotkan; cf. 
\f0\i0 kurwaawi-													cheerful person	dtcttksq\\ dtctkmxfr	from Chukchi kor!0l0n \'91joyful (person)\'92		CK V & E 131; Rub 225		kurgela	kurgela	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1088 \u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \
kurraaq	rei62	cold (one who gets ~ easily)															one who gets cold easily				CK A & W 41		kurraq	kurrxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1096 \u257 \u1179 \
kurriiqe-	rei72s-	cold (get ~ readily)		kurriiqumaluku sivungani apeghiightunga \'91while he was getting cold, I finished before him\'92; aqlaghami kurriiqmikun maklagtani aftaa \'91he butchered his bearded seal catch in the cold even when he was complaining about the cold\'92													to get cold readily		< kurraaq-iqe-		CK A & W 41		kurriqe-	kurrxqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1096 \u1251 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kurugaq	reheuf2	pig		
\f2\i uncertain how the Russian word for 
\f0\i0 \'91cow\'92
\f2\i came to mean 
\f0\i0 \'91pig\'92; 
\f2\i though at least one pig is known to have been brought to St. Lawrence Is.; 
\f0\i0 Akituqat sungaat miluutegpenaki 
\f2\i kurugaghnun
\f0\i0 , luuraq tutmaasghaqnayukatki. \'91Neither cast ye your pearls (expensive beads) before 
\f2\i swine
\f0\i0 , lest they trample them under their feet.\'92 (Matthew 7.6)													pig		from Russian rjhjdf (korova) \'91cow\'92, perhaps via Chukchi korowal!0n \'91cow\'92	14			kurugaq	kurugaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
kurugiiq, kuruwiiq	reheu72. rehe172	ivory gull			gull (ivory ~)	
\f2\i Pagophila eburnea											
\f0\i0 ivory gull (Pagophila eburnea)						kurugiq, kuruwiq	kurugxq, kuruwxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1251 \u1179 , \u1082 \u1091 \u1088 \u1091 \u1265 \u1251 \u1179 \
Kurupka	Rehegrf	Val\'92karvaam R. (village on ~ in Chukotka)		
\f2\i to the west of the Yupik area in Chukotka; see Map 1 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 village on Val\'92karvaam R. in Chukotka				CK		Kurupka	Kurupka	\uc0\u1050 \u1091 \u1088 \u1091 \u1087 \u1082 \u1072 \
Kurupkeraq	Rehegrshf2	fomer village east of Cape Chukotskii in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 fomer village east of Cape Chukotskii in Chukotka						Kurupkeraq	Kurupkeraq	\uc0\u1050 \u1091 \u1088 \u1091 \u1087 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
kurwaawi-	reh161b-	joyful (be ~ for no particular reason)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E); cf. 
\f0\i0 kurgela													to be joyful for no particular reason	dtctkbncz ,tp ghbxbys	from Chukchi kor!0l0n \'91joyful (person)\'92		CK V & E 170 		kurwawi-	kurwxwi-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1088 \u1265 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\

\f1\b kusga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub rec[f\super s	\nosupersub dirt															dirt						kusgae	kusgae	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1093 \u1072 \u1099 \
kusge-	rec[s-	squeamish		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  kusgeyugtuq \'91he feels squeamish\'92; kusgekaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kusgeyukaa \'91he feels squeamish over it\'92; kusgenaq \'91something that makes one feel squeamish\'92; kusgenaghtuq \'91it makes one feel squeamish\'92; kusgeketaghtuq \'91he is often squeamish\'92	finicky												squeamish; finicky						kusge-	kusge-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1093 \u1099 -\
kusgeluughqe-	rec[sk052s-	dirty (make ~)		kusgeluughqaa \'91he got it dirty\'92 / 													to make dirty		< kusge-?-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				kusgelughqe-	kusgelxghqe-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1093 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
kusgetu-	rec[sne-	dirty (be ~)		kusgetuuq \'91it is dirty\'92 /													to be dirty		< kusga-tu-				kusgetu-	kusgetu-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1093 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 -\
kusukaq	rec/rf2	glaciated spot where water has dripped and frozen on ground or other surface															glaciated spot where water has dripped and frozen on ground or other surface		PE kucuka3				kusukaq	kusukaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
kuufkallghugh-	r8arfk]5e4-	pour excessively		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E);
\f0\i0  kuufkallghughtuq \'91it is pouring (rain, water)\'92													to pour excessively		< kuuve-?-		CK V & E 23		kufkallghugh-	kxfkallghugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kuuk	r8r	cook															cook		from English \'91cook\'92	SLI			kuk	kxk	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1082 \
kuukeq	r8rs2	harpoon part (ivory piece between head and shaft of harpoon)											also listed as kukeq (in curriculum manual)				ivory piece between head and shaft of harpoon						kukeq	kxkeq	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \
kuukgun, kuukguta	r8r[ey. r8r[enf	light (source of ~)		Taana nighuk 
\f2\i kuukgutnguuq
\f0\i0  mamlegmi, \'85 \'91That radiance was a 
\f2\i source of light
\f0\i0  in the darkness, \'85\'92 (John 1.5)													source of light		< kukegte-(u)n				kukgun, kukguta	kxkgun, kxkguta	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1082 \u1093 \u1091 \u1085 , \u1082 \u1263 \u1082 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
kuukgute-	r8r[ens-	light (give ~)		kuukgutuq \'91it is shining\'92; ighaleqetaaq kuukgutuq, asivaam tungagakun \'91a star is shining from the east\'92 
\f2\i (from a hymn); 
\f0\i0 kuukgutaqaa naaghsaq \'91he is striking the match\'92	shine	kindle a flame											to give light; to shine; to kindle a flame		< kukegte-(u)te-				kukgute-	kxkgute-	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1082 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kuukguuy	r8r[8q	oh!		
\f2\i particle; an exclamation of surprise, fear, wonder or dismay at having undergone an experience;
\f0\i0  = kakuuy, kuy, kukguuy													oh!		from Chukchi ?	x			kukguy	kxkgxy	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1082 \u1093 \u1263 \u1253 \

\f1\b kuula\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub r8kz\super s	\nosupersub coal		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 coal		from English \'91coal\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R222, V&E46)		
\f0\i0 kulae	kxlae	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
kuumgun	r8vuen	comb for grass		
\f2\i used in the plural
\f0\i0 , kuumgutet,
\f2\i  for one
\f0\i0  
\f2\i such comb; traditionally such combs were made of ivory	
\f0\i0 plant used for scouring cooking utensils	horsetail (scouring rush)								
\f2\i Equisetum fluviatile			
\f0\i0 a certain plant used for scouring cooking utensils, probably horsetail (scouring rush) 
\f2\i (Equisetum fluviatile); 
\f0\i0 comb= for grass		PE kum!un (under PE kum0!-); < kumeg-(u)n				kumgun	kxmgun	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1084 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \
kuuni	r8yb	horse		Pimakangat, "Qikmighllak inga ugighsaghsugnighllawaaghuuq." Ruuseghmiim taam qineghlluni pimakangi, \'93Qikmiinghituq 
\f2\i kuuniguuq
\f0\i0  ugighsiituq.\'94 \'91They told him, \'93There\'92s a huge dog out there and it really looks mean.\'94 The Russian angrily told them, \'93It isn\'92t a dog; it\'92s a 
\f2\i horse
\f0\i0 , and it\'92s not mean.\'94 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:208)													horse		from Russian rjym (kon\'92) \'91horse\'92, probably via Chukchi konekon, pl. konet \'91horse\'92	14			kuni	kxni	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1085 \u1080 \

\f1\b Kuusma\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub R8cvf\super s	\nosupersub Christmas		Quyanaghhalek Kuusmemi \'91Merry Christmas!\'92; Quyanaghhaghmeng Kuusma ama quyanalghii nutaghaq ayumiqulleq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  Quyasqelluten Kuusmemi ama nutaghami ayumiqulleghmi \'91Merry Christmas and a happy new year!\'92													Christmas		from English \'91Christmas\'92	SLI			Kusmae	Kxsmae	\uc0\u1050 \u1263 \u1089 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
Kuusmeyagh-	R8cvsz4-	go somewhere for Christmas			Christmas (go for ~)												to go somewhere for Christmas		< Kuusma-yagh-				Kusmeyagh-	Kxsmeyagh-	\uc0\u1050 \u1263 \u1089 \u1084 \u1099 \u1103 \u1271 -\
kuusneq	r8cy]s2	pelvis bones of person or animal		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 kuusneghek
\f2\i , for one person's or animal\'92s pelvic bones													
\f0\i0 pelvis bones of person or animal		PE ku9uccin03 (under PE ku0ucci3)				kusneq	kxsneq	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
kuutu-, kuutughmete-	r8ne-. r8ne4vsns-	pigeon-toed (be ~)		kuutuuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kuutughmetuq \'91he is pigeon-toed\'92 / kuutughmelnguq \'91pigeon-toed person\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  kuutughte-													to be pigeon-toed		PE ku(C)u(!)				kutu-, kutughmete-	kxtu-, kxtughmete-	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1090 \u1091 -, \u1082 \u1263 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kuutughte-	r8ne5ns-	turn one\'92s toes inward		kuutughtuq \'91he turned his toes inward\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  kuutu-													to turn one\'92s toes inward		PE ku(C)u(!)				kutughte-	kxtughte-	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
kuuve-	r8ds-	spill		kuuvuq \'91it spilled\'92; kuuvaa \'91he spilled it\'92 / kuuviiq \'91he spilled something\'92	pour												to spill; to pour		< kuve- 				kuve-	kxve-	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1074 \u1099 -\
kuuvragh-	r8dhf4-	set a seal net															to set a seal net						kuvragh-	kxvragh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
kuuvraq	r8dhf2	seal net			net (seal ~)												seal net		PE kuv9a3				kuvraq	kxvraq	\uc0\u1082 \u1263 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
kuvaghaan	redf46y	bird figurine (small flat-bottomed ivory ~ used in a certain game)		kuvaghaatet \'91set of bird figurines used for the game\'92	figurine (small flat-bottomed ivory bird ~ used in a certain game)												small flat-bottomed ivory bird figurine used in a certain game		< ?-(u)n		VK\'92s notes		kuvaghan	kuvaghxn	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1085 \
kuve-	reds-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > kuuve-, kuvesilghaq, kuvugh-															PE kuv0-				kuve-	kuve-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 -\
kuvesilghaq	redscbk4f2	trash container			dump												dump; trash container		< kuve-?-lghaq				kuvesilghaq	kuvesilghaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
kuvugh-	rede4-	spill or pour intermittently		kuvughaa \'91he spilled it out in several actions\'92													to intermittently spill or pour		< kuve-ugh-				kuvugh-	kuvugh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1271 -\
kuvuqaq	rede2f2	bullet		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 bullet		< kuvugh-(g)kaq				kuvuqaq	kuvuqaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
kuy, kuuy	req. r8q	oh!		
\f2\i particle; exclamation of surprise, fear, wonder or dismay at having undergone an experience;
\f0\i0  = kakuuy, kukguuy													oh!						kuy, kuy	kuy, kxy	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1253 , \u1082 \u1263 \u1253 \
kuyagaaq	rezu62			
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 meat from spinal area	vzcj c gjpdjyjxybrf	< kuyak-?		Rub. 225		kuyagaq	kuyagxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1103 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 \
kuyaguq	rezue2	spinal sinew		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 sinew, spinal								check				spinal sinew	;bkf gjpdjyjxybrf	< kuyak-?		Rub. 225		kuyaguq	kuyaguq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \
kuyak	rezr	spine (upper part)			keel of boat												spine (upper part); keel of boat		PE kuya!				kuyak	kuyak	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1103 \u1082 \
kuyak	rezr	crack in ice		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 kuyagek
\f2\i , used for one such crack													
\f0\i0 crack in ice				CK Rub 225		kuyak	kuyak	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1103 \u1082 \
kuyapegaq	rezgsuf2	vertebra		
\f2\i the 
\f0\i0 \'91gear, cogwheel, pinion\'92 
\f2\i meaning is Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 gear	cogwheel							< kuyak-?-;	pinion			vertebra; gear; cogwheel; pinion		PE kuyap0!a3 (under PE kuya!)				kuyapegaq	kuyapegaq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
kuykuna	reqreyf	duckling		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  naayvami qawaaq igleghtaquq 
\f2\i kuykunatuumaghmi
\f0\i0  \'91in the lake there\'92s a bird going along with a 
\f2\i duckling
\f0\i0 \'92													duckling		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 220		kuykuna	kuykuna	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1253 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \
kuyngae	req3fs	pipe (for smoking)															pipe (for smoking)		from Chukchi koy&0n \'91pipe\'92	14			kuyngae	kuyngae	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
kuyngeraaq	req3sh62	vessel, small, for sacrifice		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check this; kuyngae means \'91pipe (for smoking)\'92, so the semantics don\'92t quite mesh since -raaq means \'91new-fangled\'92				small vessel for sacrifice	vfktymrbq cjcel lkz ;thndjghbyjitybq	< kuynga-raaq		Rub. 221		kuyngeraq	kuyngerxq	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b kuyulnga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub reqek3f\super s	\nosupersub deep part of river or channel		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 kuyulngek
\f2\i , used for one channel;
\f0\i0  esneghagni kuyulngek elqughaghllukek iteghtukut aghqitaghitaghtegpenaamta \'91we went through the deep part of the channel without getting into the shallow part\'92	river (very deep part of ~ or channel)	channel (very deep part of river or ~)											very deep part of river or channel		from Koryak kuyul \'91small bar, creek\'92, and/or kuul(kuul) \'91small deep river\'92, but the Koryak/ Chukchi may itself be from PE ku90! \'91river\'92		CK A & W 41		kuyulngae	kuyulngae	\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1253 \u1091 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
kwugg	r1e[	oh good!		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 = kukugugg													oh good!		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 221 CK		kwugg	kwugg	\uc0\u1082 \u1265 \u1091 \u1093 \
laag-	k9u-	dig		laagtuq \'91he dug\'92; laagaa \'91he dug it\'92					.154004								to dig		PE 0la!-				lag-	lxg-	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 -\
laaghigh-	k94b4-	reach edge of shore ice or shoreward edge of pack ice			edge of ice breaks off				.1540051105								to reach edge of  shore ice or shoreword edge of pack ice; for edge of ice to break off		< laaq-(ng)igh-				laghigh-	lxghigh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
laak	k9r	lock		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 laagek
\f2\i , for one lock; also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 lock	pfvjr	from English \'91lock\'92	SLI Chuk.	... CK V & E 81 (russ voc); 
\f2\i (R303, V&E85)		
\f0\i0 lak	lxk	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \

\f1\b Laakaghmii(t
\f2\i\b0 )	
\f0\i0 K9rf4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)		
\f2\i also called 
\f0\i0 Ugaliit													a particular clan		< ?-mii			xxxt	Lakaghmi(t)	Lxkaghmx(t)	\uc0\u1051 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
laalighfike-	k9kb5abrs-	visit		laalighfikaa \'91he visited her\'92 /													to visit		< laalighte-vik-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				lalighfike-	lxlighfike-	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
laalighqwaagh-	k9kb52165ns-	visit around house to house															to visit around house to house		< laalighte-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -		VK\'92s notes		lalighqwagh-	lxlighqwxgh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
laalighte-	k9kb5ns-	visit		laalightuq \'91he visited\'92; laalightaa \'91he visited her\'92 
\f2\i (for some speakers); others use 
\f0\i0 laalighfike- 
\f2\i (q.v.) 
\f0\i0 /					.15401511302536								to visit		PY-S 0lali3-				lalighte-	lxlighte-	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
laaliq	k9kb2	visitor		laalit \'91visitors\'92; Entaqun uygureghaneng maaken 
\f2\i laalineng
\f0\i0  ungipamsugmeng nagaqughaqaqa government-emnguq maana quyngiliqaqegkanga igataghllagmeng kenlekluku. \'91From hearsay and from 
\f2\i visitors
\f0\i0 , I heard that the government established the reindeer herd because of the famines.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:10) 													visitor		< laalighte-		VK\'92s notes		laliq	lxliq	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
laalit	k9kbn	visitors from another place		
\f2\i always (?) plural; apparently a direct nominaliztion of 
\f0\i0 laalighte-, 
\f2\i without 
\f0\i0 te
\f2\i ; 
\f0\i0  laalit qakun uteghnighnaqaqat? \'91when are the visitors returning to their home?\'92; laalit aqelqaghniighnaqaqiit \'91they are going to challenge the visitors in games (like wrestling and running)\'92									is there a singular laaliq?				visitors from another place				CK A & W 42		lalit	lxlit	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1080 \u1090 \
laalmeghqun	k9kvs52ey	rope used to fasten ribs of boat to frame		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rope used to fasten ribs of boat to frame		< laalmik-?-(u)n		CK Rub 303		lalmeghqun	lxlmeghqun	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
laalmik	k9kvbr	rib of bent-rib boat			floor piece which lies perpendicular to and across the keel in a flat-bottom boat				.154015171113								rib of bent-rib boat; floor piece which lies perpendicular to and across the keel in a flat-bottom boat		PE nalmi!-				lalmik	lxlmik	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
laaq	k92	flaw polynya		
\f2\i see item 36 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	polynya (flaw ~)	open water between shore ice and pack ice			.154014					shore lead			inner edge of pack ice; open water between shore ice and pack ice; flaw polynya; shore lead					> laaghigh-	laq	lxq	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
laar\'92ta	k9hnf	lard			shortening												lard; shortening		from English \'91lard\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 159		lar\'92ta	lxr\'92ta	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1088 \u1090 \u1072 \
Laavlaaghmii	K9dk94v7	Laplander		
\f2\i Saami, previously termed Laplanders,were brought to St. Lawrence Island and other parts of Alaska around the turn of the century to introduce reindeer herding; 
\f0\i0 Taagken 
\f2\i Laavlaaghhaat
\f0\i0  neqngat aglaataghput. \'85 Pinit net taakut, 
\f2\i Laavlaaghhaat
\f0\i0 , quyngimeng piit. \'91We ferried the 
\f2\i Laplanders\'92
\f0\i0  provisions. \'85 They were good people those 
\f2\i Laplanders
\f0\i0 , they dealt with the reindeer.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:50)	Saami				.1540031540051711								Saami; Laplander						Lavlaghmi	Lxvlxghmx	\uc0\u1051 \u1103 \u772 \u1074 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 \
laawaaq	k9162	dug out hole in ground for storing meat															dug out hole in ground for storing meat		< laag-?-				lawaq	lxwxq	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
lalala	kzkzkz	dew on grass							.154015401540								dew on grass		from Chukchi lelel \'91dew\'92	14			lalala	lalala	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u1083 \u1103 \u1083 \u1103 \
Laluramkae	Kzk/hfvrfs	white person			Caucasian				.15401539230117130136~								white person; Caucasian		from Chukchi lelut, sing. lalol!0n \'91mustache, beard\'92, and remk0n \'91people\'92	09, 14			Laluramkae	Laluramkae	\uc0\u1051 \u1103 \u1083 \u1102 \u1088 \u1072 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1099 \
laluwaay	kzk/16q	dried onion		= laluwaaya\super e\nosupersub ; laluwaayet \'91onions\'92, \'91dried onions\'92, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91wild chives\'92	onion	chive, wild								
\f2\i Alium schoenoprasum			
\f0\i0 dried onion; onion; wild chive (
\f2\i Alium schoenoprasum
\f0\i0 )		from Chukchi leluw\'92ey \'91?\'92 (said to be related to Chukchi lelut, sing. lalol!0n \'91mustache, beard\'92, because of the roots of the onion looking like a beard)				laluway	laluwxy	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u1083 \u1102 \u1265 \u257 \u1253 \

\f1\b laluwaaya\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub kzk/16q\super s	\nosupersub dried onion		= laluwaay; laluwaayet \'91onions\'92, \'91dried onions\'92, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91wild chives\'92	onion	chive, wild								
\f2\i Alium schoenoprasum			
\f0\i0 dried onion; onion; wild chive (
\f2\i Alium schoenoprasum
\f0\i0 )		from Chukchi leluw\'92ey \'91?\'92 (said to be related to Chukchi lelut, sing. lalol!0n \'91mustache, beard\'92, because of the roots of the onion looking like a beard)				laluwayae	laluwxyae	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u1083 \u1102 \u1265 \u257 \u1253 \u1099 \
lampa	kzvgf	lumber		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 board												lumber; board	ljcrf	from English \'91lumber\'92	SLI Chuk.	V&E84		lampa	lampa	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u1084 \u1087 \u1072 \
langetaq	kz3snf2	maybe		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle; 
\f0\i0 = lengetaq; Aa-a weni inga umiilegput aqnighaquq aqsamineng. 
\f2\i Langetaq
\f0\i0  aqfalleqaatnga. \'91Okay, our chief is in pain from his stomach. 
\f2\i Maybe
\f0\i0  they\'92ll come get me.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 29); Angigum pii Ukaziq, \'93Qinuyupigtunga.\'94 \'93
\f2\i Langetaq
\f0\i0  ughugnaquten, enkaam qinuyugtuten.\'94 akitaa Ukazim. \'91Snow said to Hare, \'93I\'92m very upset.\'94 \'93
\f2\i Most likely
\f0\i0  you\'92re going to melt, and (that\'92s why) you\'92re upset.\'94 Hare answered him.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 37)	might (maybe)	likely			.15401936250114					I think			maybe; might; likely; I think		from Chukchi le&0taq \'91well then, evidently, indeed, probably; really\'92				langetaq	langetaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
lata	kznf	letter (correspondence or letter of the alphabet)			epistle (in the Bible)				.15402501								letter (correspondence or letter of the alphabet); epistle (in the Bible)		from English \'91letter\'92	SLI			lata	lata	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \
lata-	kznf-	write a letter		lataaq \'91he wrote a letter\'92; lataa \'91he wrote a letter to her\'92 / Inuughnguq taana 
\f2\i igaqayuugtevyiiqaalghii
\f0\i0 , umiilganun 
\f2\i latasluku
\f0\i0  aghveghniighyat. \'91That Inuuq had learned to 
\f2\i write
\f0\i0  a little, and they had him 
\f2\i write a letter
\f0\i0  to the captain of the whaling ship.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 18)					.15402501								to write a letter						lata-	lata-	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 -\
lavyu	kzdm/	sweetheart		= yavlu					.1540033739								sweetheart		from English \'91love you\'92	SLI			lavyu	lavyu	\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u1074 \u1100 \u1102 \
legalngu-	ksufk3e2	wasteful (feel that one shouldn\'92t be ~)		legalnguuq \'91he feels that he should be careful with something that he has and conserve it\'92 /	careful (be ~ with what one has)	conserve			.1536040115192614								to feel that one shouldn\'92t be wasteful; to be careful with what one has; to conserve things						legalngu-	legalngu-	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
legalnguke-	ksufk3ers-	conserve (feel that one should ~ (it))		legalngukaa \'91he feels that it is too valuable to waste\'92 /	value												to feel that one should conserve (it); to value		< legalngu-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				legalnguke-	legalnguke-	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 -\
legalngun	ksufk3ey	fortunate (how ~ (in one\'92s catch)!)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  legalngun una unangsaamaaq \'91how fortunate; this one got a lot of seals\'92; legalngun tepaq sivungiisimaa \'91how fortunate; he picked the sea food before anyone else could\'92													how fortunate (in one\'92s catch)!		< legalngu-?		CK A & W 42		legalngun	legalngun	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \
legalngunaghhalek	ksufk3eyf5fksr	valuable (how ~ it is!)		
\f2\i particle					
\f0\i0 .1536040115192618013001153613								how valuable it is!		< legalngu-naghhalek				legalngunaghhalek	legalngunaghhalek	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
legan	ksufy	and so		
\f2\i particle;  
\f0\i0 suflugameng puyguluta guututfut legan qalqalimangwaaghuuftuq \'91we forgot to bring a gun and so the only weapon we had was a hatchet\'92; tumet atughanka legan tunaget pinit igleghhrakeggnat \'91I followed a trail that was so smooth that it made me go faster\'92; kaay, sangan mekelghiighhaq legan qelpeghunneghmeng aghtuumaaq aqlaghaghllagmi muluughllagem iiggngi legan ilanqut \'91oh, the cold was so extreme that the poor little boy couldn't open the door for so long that his hands are cold as ice\'92; \'91Qavaghllagtuq elngaatall umupiglluku. Nanghiiqwaaghsaqminigu 
\f2\i legan
\f0\i0  teghtunghituq qapragteghngaatni. \'91She slept very deeply. 
\f2\i And so
\f0\i0  when he tried even though he nudged her, she didn't wake up.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. II:10); "Aa-aa-aa, meghmun nagneghnaaghtuten!" "Estugenkami taakut, 
\f2\i legan
\f0\i0  pakinegllequnga, nuqneghllequnga." \'91\'93Oh-oh, you might go right into the water!\'94 \'93These nails 
\f2\i then
\f0\i0 , I\'92ll dig them into the ground and hang on.\'94\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:6)	so that	sure!			.1536040118					go ahead and do it!			and so; so that; sure!; go ahead and do it!		from Chukchi l0!en \'91and simply; and only, just\'92			> leganamen, leganqun	legan	legan	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1085 \
leganamen	ksufyfvsy	almost able to do something		
\f2\i particle					
\f0\i0 .153604011801173618								almost able to do something		< legan-?		VK		leganamen	leganamen	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1085 \
leganqun	ksufy2ey	as though		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 good job				.1536040118142618								as though; good job!		< legan=qun				leganqun	leganqun	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
legasiighwagh-	ksufc741f4-	fun (have ~ in a way inappropriate for the situation, or make ~ of someone or something)		Apamta 
\f2\i legasiighwaghtesnanighaqiinkut
\f0\i0  samengllu kinkunengllu. \'91Our grandfather told us not to 
\f2\i make fun of
\f0\i0  anything or anyone.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 83); 
\f2\i Legasiighwaamaghmi
\f0\i0  qitevaquq. \'91He is talking 
\f2\i crazy
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 83); 
\f2\i Legasiighwaghtenun
\f0\i0  apeghtuusaqegpenaki Kiyaghneghem Akuzitangi, qayughllak qikmistunllu kurugaghestunllu ayuqut. \'91Don\'92t give God\'92s Word to 
\f2\i scoffers
\f0\i0 , as they are like dogs and pigs.\'92 (Mathhew 7.6)	crazy (act ~)				.15360401241105270105								to have fun in a way inappropriate for the situation; to make fun of someone or something; to act crazy						legasighwagh-	legasxghwagh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
legh-	ks4-	flatus (expel ~)		
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  leq	fart				.153605								to expel flatus; to fart		PE n0l03-				legh-	legh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
legha-	ks4f-	breathe (be unable to ~ due to crying (of infants mostly))		leghaaq \'91he can't breathe due to his crying\'92 /					.15360501								to be unable to breathe due to crying (of infants mostly)						legha-	legha-	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 -\
leghlleq	ks5k]s2	emperor goose			
\f2\i Chen canagica				
\f0\i0 .153630163614								emperor goose (Chen canagica)		PE n03l03				leghlleq	leghlleq	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
leghni	ks4yb	rotten odor		meghutek tepeghllaguuk leghniighsimaak \'91the can is stinky; it now has a rotten odor\'92; maatneghmelnguut neqet leghniighsugumaat \'91food that stays in warm areas tend to get a rotten odor\'92	odor, rotten												rotten odor		< leq-ni\super 2		\nosupersub CK A & W 42		leghni	leghni	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \
leghni	ks4yb	flatulent smell															flatulent smell		< leq-ni\super 2		\nosupersub VK\'92s notes		leghni	leghni	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \

\f1\b leghughtaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ks4e5nf2\super \'a1	\nosupersub sound of distant continuing gunfire															sound of distant continuing gunfire				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 157		leghughtaq1	leghughtaq1	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b leghughtaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ks4e5nf2\super \'99	\nosupersub accordian (musical instrument)															accordian (musical instrument)				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 157		leghughtaq2	leghughtaq2	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 2\
legra- / legre-	ksuhf- ksuhs-	nosy (be ~)		legraaq \'91he was being nosy, was snooping\'92 / 
\f2\i the
\f0\i0  
\f2\i base, if used with suffix that begins with a consonant rather than a vowel, is
\f0\i0  legre-: legretkaa \'91he was nosy about it, snooped into it it\'92; legrefqaavek \'91don't be nosy!\'92; Ellnga qayughllak 
\f2\i legrengigatuq
\f0\i0  . \'85 Sasqeqaghtaqlinkut ipa meghtiisqiinkut, kayusiitesquq, taghnughhiqutesquq, 
\f2\i legrenayukamta
\f0\i0 . \'91She, for some reason, was not 
\f2\i inquisitive
\f0\i0 . \'85 She would tell us to do many things, such as fetch water, help her, or take care of children, thinking we might be 
\f2\i inquisitive.\'92
\f0\i0   (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:138); = regla-, regra-	inquisitive (be ~)	curious (be ~)			.1536042301								to be nosy; to be curious; to be inquisitive						legra-	legra-	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 - \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1099 -\
legreghllak	ksuhs5k]zr	nosy person			curious person				.153604233630164013								nosy person; curious person		< legra-ghllak				legreghllak	legreghllak	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
legreliqe-	ksuhskb2s-	inquire			probe around	snoop around											to inquire; to probe or snoop around		< legra-liqe-		VK\'92s notes		legreliqe-	legreliqe-	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
lelaqa	kskz2f	dog		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 dog		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 302		lelaqa	lelaqa	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \u1072 \
lengaaghuute-	ks3648ns-	ring (make ringing sound)		lengaaghuutuq \'91it rang\'92; lengaaghuutaa \'91he rang it\'92 /													to ring		< lengaaq-uute-		VK		lengaghute-	lengxghxte-	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u257 \u1271 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
lengaaq	ks362	bell (sound of ~)			ringing sound				.1536190114								sound of bell; ringing sound		PY-S 0@0&a$aq				lengaq	lengxq	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u257 \u1179 \
lengerit	ks3shbn	every time		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle; 
\f0\i0 lengerit aghneghtughtekagu masaghiyaaghlleqaa \'91when the days are longer, it will get warmer\'92; lengerit qenwat pinaaghtut \'91the ice in the rivers is finally breaking up\'92	always	will happen (for the good)			.15361936231125								every time; always; it will happen (for the good)		from Chukchi l0&0rit \'91usually\'92				lengerit	lengerit	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1088 \u1080 \u1090 \
lengetaq	ks3snf2	maybe		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle; 
\f0\i0 = langetaq	might (maybe)	likely			.15361936250114					I think			maybe; might; likely; I think		from Chukchi le&0taq \'91well then, evidently, indeed, probably; really\'92				lengetaq	lengetaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b lengka\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ks3rf\super s	\nosupersub avalanche															avalanche		from Chukchi l0&k0l0&, pl. l0&k0t, \'91snowdrift on slope\'92		VK		lengkae	lengkae	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1082 \u1072 \u1099 \
lengke-	ks3rs-	avalanche (for snow to fall in an ~ on one)		lengkaa (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  lengkevikaa) \'91it (avalanche) fell on him\'92 /					.1536191336								for snow to fall in an avalanche on one		from Chukchi l0&k0l0&, pl. l0&k0t, \'91snowdrift on slope\'92				lengke-	lengke-	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1082 \u1099 -\
leq	ks2	flatus		
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  legh-	fart				.153614								flatus; fart		PE n0l03-				leq	leq	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
levekluk	ksdsrk]/r	deep hollow vibrating sound		levekluguutuq \'91it made a deep hollow sound\'92	sound (deep hollow vibrating ~)				.1536033613163913								deep hollow vibrating sound (like a plane, boat, or thunder in the distance)		+ PY-S l0v? \'91vibrating sound\'92 (cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik l0via3- \'91flap in wind\'92, l0vaaq \'91outboard motor\'92)				levekluk	levekluk	\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
liighqe-	k752s-	cut out a pattern		liighqaa \'91he cut the pieces for it\'92 / liighqiiq \'91he cut out pieces for something\'92	plan (make a ~ (on paper))	pattern (cut out a ~)			.1511301436								to cut out a pattern; to make a plan (on paper)		PE 0li3q0-			; > liighqisik, liiqneq, liighqutaq	lighqe-	lxghqe-	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
liighqisiq	k752bcb2	scissors		liighqisigka \'91my pair of scissors\'92	knife for cutting out pattern	saw for cutting out pattern											scissors (when used in dual); knife or saw for cutting out pattern		< liighqe-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				lighqisiq	lxghqisiq	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
liighqutaq	k752enf2	pattern for sewing or otherwise making something							.1511301426250114								pattern for sewing or otherwise making something		< liighqe-qutaq				lighqutaq	lxghqutaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
liigi	k7ub	known  (something ~)		liigi anuqliqestaq kellghiit wiin esghapakaghyaqlegestun \'91the ones leaving by boat knew the wind was picking up, they should\'92ve watched the weather\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  liite-	sensed (something ~)												something known; something sensed				CK A & W 42; Rub 299		ligi	lxgi	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1075 \u1080 \
liigike-	k7ubrs-	recognize		liigikaa \'91he recognized it, sensed it\'92 / liigikiiq \'91he sensed something\'92; liigikestuq \'91he revealed who he was\'92; liigiknaghtuq it is understandable\'92	sense	understand			.151104111336					aware (be ~ of (it))			to recognize; to sense; to understand; to be aware of (it)		< liigi-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				ligike-	lxgike-	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1075 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
liigiketagh-	k7ubrsnf4-	quick-witted (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 shrewd (be ~)												to be quick-witted; to be shrewd	ljuflkbdsq	< liigike-tagh\super 3\nosupersub -		Rub. 299		ligiketagh-	lxgiketagh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1075 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
liigilliigh-	k74bk]74-	understand fully		naten igleghtestaqutkek liigilliiqufkek aghtughnanighlleqagken \'91if you fully learn how to start it, you won\'92t have any problems with it\'92; maaqellghek liigilliighlukek ayuqagket \'91they have learned how the current runs\'92; Qineghpeghwaaghaqelghiinga 
\f2\i liigilliighyama
\f0\i0 . \'91I\'92d scout with binoculars when I 
\f2\i got to know (the area)
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:156)	learn completely	master (a subject)											to fully understand; to learn completely; to master (a subject)		< liigi-?-		VK\'92s notes & in texts		ligilligh-	lxgillxgh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
liilightugh- 	k7kb5ne4-	advise		liilightughtuq \'91he is teaching or advising\'92; liilightughaa \'91he is teaching him or advising him\'92 / liilightughaa meghnalisqelluku \'91he advised him to rest\'92 	instruct concerning how to life	teach the rules and ways of life			.1511151130252605								to advise; to instruct concerning how to life; teach the rules and ways of life						lilightugh- 	lxlightugh- 	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
liilightuusaq	k7kb5n8cz2	law		liilightuusat aapghumiit igam igleghneghi \'91the rules tell about how the school runs\'92; liilightuusat maliglluteng pinightut \'91it is good to follow rules\'92; Tamaatum 
\f2\i liilightuusaa
\f0\i0 , eslam, sikum, meghem, maaqellghem,saamllu ilangan natetulnganeng liilluteng wetku ellmegneng mu-ghusaaghteghyuget nukalpigat. \'91Young men had to master the 
\f2\i rules
\f0\i0  concerning weather, ice, sea conditions, currents, and other things they would learn about before they could go out hunting on the ice by themselves.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:130)	rule of conduct	admonition								rule of life			law; rule of conduct; admonition		< liightugh-(u)saq				lilightusaq	lxlightxsaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
liinnaquma-	kby]f2evf-	learn (always be ready and eager to ~)		liinnaqumalghiit kukriqigalnguut \'91those who are willing to learn don\'92t have any difficulties\'92; liinnaqumatmineng ilamineng pillek \'91due to his willingness to learn he knows more than the others\'92	studious (be a ~ person)												to always be ready and eager to learn; to be a studious person		< liite-naqe-(i/u)ma-		CK A & W 43 		linnaquma-	lxnnaquma-	\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 -\
liipghange-	k7g5f3s-	aware (become ~)		qikmiq suumelghii liipghangluni qimagtuq \'91the dog was berserk, but when it came to its sense, it ran away\'92; ifkaghluni liipghangyalghiiminguq nevaghmeteftuq \'91he fell and got knocked out, and when he regained conciousness, he realized that he was laying on his back\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  liite-	conscious (become ~)	come to one\'92s senses											to become aware; to become conscious; to come to one\'92s senses				CK A & W 43		lipghange-	lxpghange-	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 -\
liiqneq	k72y]s2	scrap of material			leftover material				.15111418353614								scrap of material; leftover material		< liighqe-neq\super 1				\nosupersub liqneq	lxqneq	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
liisagh-	k7cz4-	teach		
\f2\i often (or even usually (?)) refers to teaching a song
\f0\i0  / liisaghtuq \'91he is teaching (a song)\'92; liisaghaa \'91he is teaching her (a song)\'92 /					.1511244005								to teach		< liite-sagh-				lisagh-	lxsagh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
liisaghagh-	k7cf4f4-	learn well and remember (of young person)		uyuqliighngaaghmi liisaghaatmineng neqamikii nallukegkiit \'91even if he is young, he remembers what the others don\'92t know\'92	comprehend well at an early age												to learn well and remember (of young person); to comprehend well at an early age				CK A & W 43		lisaghagh-	lxsaghagh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
liisaq	k7cf2	something (especially food) put aside for someone		taana liisaaguq tuguyaqunaan \'91that is being saved for someone, don\'92t take it\'92; naagu liisaqa \'91where\'92s my food that you saved for me\'92; liisalguyaghtuten aviituq \'91there was something set aside for you, but it\'92s gone\'92; = lliisaq													something (especially food) put aside for someone						lisaq	lxsaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1089 \u1072 \u1179 \
liisima-	k7cbvf-	knowledgeable (be ~)		liisimalghii \'91knowledgeable person, wise person, authority on something\'92													to be knowledgeable		< liite-(i/u)ma-		VK\'92s notes		lisima-	lxsima-	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 -\
liisimake-	k7cbvf2s-	know		liisimakaa \'91he knows him or it\'92 /					.1511241117011436								to know		< liite-ma-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				lisimake-	lxsimake-	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
liisuqe-	k7ce2s-	recognize		uyavanlluku liisuqaat nalluniilnguq \'91they recognized him from far away because it was easy to tell it was him\'92; liisuqneghmeng aghtughaat sangutanga \'91they couldn\'92t recognize what it was\'92; akuzilghii kinangutanga liisuqaa iglagakun \'91he recognized who was talking with is voice\'92													to recognize				CK A & W 43 CK 		lisuqe-	lxsuqe-	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1089 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b liite-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub k7ns-\super \'a1	\nosupersub learn		liituq \'91he learned\'92; liitaa \'91he learned it\'92 /	awareness (gain ~ of one's surroundings (said of a young child))												to learn; to gain awareness of one's surroundings (said of a young child)		PE 0lit-				lite-1	lxte-1	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub liite-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub k7ns-\super \'99	\nosupersub leave something (usually food) for another															to leave something (usually food) for another				VK\'92s notes		lite-2	lxte-2	\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub linggha-	kb34f-	hesitate to ask again due to having already asked and not received a response		lingghaaq (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  lingghayugtuq) \'91he hesitates to ask\'92 / lingghakaa \'91he hesitates to ask her\'92	tired of asking repeatedly without results (be ~)				.1511190501								to hesitate to ask again due to having already asked and not received a response; to be tired of asking repeatedly without results		PE 0li3a- and 0li&3a-				linggha-	linggha-	\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 -\
lingghayagute-	kb34fzuens-	uncomfortable (be ~)			awkward (feel ~)								should it be lingghayugute-?  probably!				to be uncomfortable; to feel awkward	ytelj,yj\\ cnfyjdbncz ytkjdrj	< linggha-yagute-		CK V & E 152		lingghayagute-	lingghayagute-	\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
lipeghsagh-	kbgs5cz4-	send for something		lipeghsaghtuq \'91he sent for something\'92; lipeghsaghaa \'91he sent for it\'92 / lipeghsaataa \'91he sent for something for her, sent instructions for her\'92	send someone with instructions	leave instructions								order (place an ~ for something)			to send for something; to send someone with instructions; to leave instructions; to place an order for something		PE t0@i-				lipeghsagh-	lipeghsagh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
lipeghsaq	kbgs5cz2	responsiveness		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; we have the verb lipeghsagh- \'91to send for someone, to leave instructions\'92; check to see if the present noun is legitimate and if it means \'91responsiveness\'92 actually				responsiveness	ghtleghtlbntkmyjcnm			Rub. 300		lipeghsaq	lipeghsaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
llaaghaaghyugnagh-	k]9464m/uyf4-	probable (be ~)							.1640050105373904180105								to be probable		< llaaghan-?-nagh-				llaghaghyugnagh-	llxghxghyugnagh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
llaaghan	k]94fy	true (it\'92s ~)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Yugughtekumtanguq avelghallemta kenlenga liilleqaghput. 
\f2\i Llaaghan
\f0\i0  maaten piyalghiikut, avelghaghaatallemta kenlenga qivghunapigsimaa liisimangilngughni. 
\f1\b '
\f0\b0 When we becom men we will learn starting from what we missed. 
\f2\i Sure enough
\f0\i0 , now, we regret not learning what we missed out on.' (SIVUQ. UNGIPAGH. 3)	certainly	surely			.1640050118					really			it's true; certainly; surely; really		from Chukchi ?	x		 > laaghaaghyugnagh-, llaaghanwha	llaghan	llxghan	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \
llaaghanam	k]64fyfv	truthfully		llaaghanam tawaten apelleghtun taawani aflumi siqineq piituq \'91it was true about they said about when the sun would rise\'92; aapghaqekangit aangqallguniluki, llaaganam pillepiguftut esghapagyaqeput \'91they say that the ball team was really good, and it was true, they were really good when we watched them\'92	definitely												truthfully; definitely		< llaaghan=am		CKK A & W 43 CK 		llaghanam	llxghanam	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1084 \
llaaghanwha	k]94fy1]f	and then		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  Aanluni, anigusighaqluni, meghek anigumeng keviimakek. 
\f2\i Llaaghanwha
\f0\i0  itegaan asingi aghimakangi. 'She went out, gathered snow, and filled her water bucked with snow. 
\f2\i And consequently
\f0\i0  the bottoms of her feet got soaked.' (UNGIPAGHAGH. 9); 
\f2\i Llaaghanwha
\f0\i0  aghnaghaam nagaquumakanga. Taagken aanumalghii. 
\f2\i Llaaghanwha
\f0\i0  aghnaghaq palaghhaghmeng  iyataneghmini neghaqelghii. \'91
\f2\i And then
\f0\i0  the girl listened to him. After that he went out.  
\f2\i And then
\f0\i0  whenever the girl got too hungry she would eat.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 72)					.1640050118273501								and then		< llaaghan=wha				llaghanwha	llxghanwha	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \
llaaghinaan	k]64by6y	good thing!		
\f2\i particle; expresses satisfaction for having made a good choice in one\'92s actions;
\f0\i0  llaaghinaan angyaamaanga, llaaghanwha neqetukut \'91good thing I went boating, we got food\'92; llaaghinaan apeghtughilghiit nagataqaput \'91good thing we listen to them teaching\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  llaaghan													good thing!				CK A & W 43 CK 		llaghinan	llxghinxn	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u257 \u1085 \
llaaghwneq	k]641ys2	muscular person		yuget iknaqughikat llaaghwneghet \'91men who became strong, have very large muscles\'92; mataghsalghiimi llaaghwnepiguftuq \'91when he took off his chothes, he turned out to have large muscles\'92	person with large muscles												muscular person; person with large muscles				CK A & W 44		llaghwneq	llxghwneq	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1271 \u1265 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
llaak	k]9r	extremities of the body of a whale, person, etc.							.164013								the extremities of the body of a whale, person, etc.						llak	llxk	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
llagigh-	k]9ub4-	cut off		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 to cut off	jnhtpfnm			CK V & E 189		llagigh-	llagigh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
llangaqa	k]z3f2f	looks as if		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Mangteghapigit taagantusaghpetut, 
\f2\i llangaqa
\f0\i0  maaken aaftaghaghluteng taagavek. \'91Their traditional houses were out that way, and 
\f2\i it seems like 
\f0\i0 that were separated from here.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:10); Taana 
\f2\i llangaqa
\f0\i0  eghqwaaq nangllegsiisiiguq ama igamsiqayugusiiguq. \'91
\f2\i Apparently
\f0\i0  that ceremony of making offerings was to show one\'92s compassion and thankfulness.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:206)	looks like	sounds like			.164019011401					apparently			looks as if; looks like; sounds like; apparently		from Chukchi ?	x			llangaqa	llangaqa	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \
lleqa	k]s2f	turns out (it ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle	
\f0\i0 contrary (on the ~)				.16361401								it turns out; on the contrary		from Chukchi ?	x			lleqa	lleqa	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \
lleve-	k]sds-	decorate or be decorated		kaamgek ulimaaghqek llevlutek ayuquk \'91the skinboots she made have a fancy design\'92; ughnegegni llevlukek kakiiqaak \'91she is sewing them with a fancy design\'92	sew or be sewn with a fancy design	fancy design (sew or be sewn with a ~)							cf. NSY lleve- \'91to circle, revolve, rotate\'92 -- cognate? maybe	design (sew or be sewn with a fancy ~)			to decorate or be decorated; to sew or be sewn with a fancy design				A&W 44		lleve-	lleve-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
llevlu-	k]sdk/-	handywork (put fancy ~ on garment)															to put fancy handywork on garment				VK\'92s notes		llevlu-	llevlu-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1102 -\
lli-	k]b-	place (put)		llii \'91he put it (somewhere)\'92 / navek llizigu? \'91where did you put it?\'92	put	set			.1611								to place; to put; to set		PE 0@i-			> llimtaaq, llivelghak, lliveq, llivike-	lli-	lli-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
lliigh-	k]74-	become a certain way		lliightuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  lliighaa \'91he became (thus)\'92 / \'91Sivuqamun lliightuq \'91she started living in Gambell\'92; Elpeklu tawaten 
\f2\i lliighnaquten
\f0\i0  whangkutestun. \'91And you are going to 
\f2\i become
\f0\i0  like us.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. II 37); Taam kingunganeng elngaatall aghveghniiq akuzisaghanguq qafsin'ggaawaqluni 
\f2\i lliightuq
\f0\i0 . \'91After that the issue of whale hunting was discussed prominently, and 
\f2\i reached the point that 
\f0\i0 only a few could be taken. (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:34); Iwerngaqun herder-ngughsimaamta money-ngiighhaghmeng ilaluta 
\f2\i lliighiinkut
\f0\i0 . \'91But when we became herders it 
\f2\i became such that
\f0\i0  we were paid with a little bit of money.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:82)	start living in a certain place				.161105								to become a certain way; to start living in a certain place		PE 0li3- (under PE 0li-)				lligh-	llxgh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
lliighqaq	k]752f2	piece of skin that has been cut out		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  liighqe-													piece of skin that has been cut out	hfphepfnm. rhjbn (yfgh. irehe)			CK V & E 92, CK		llighqaq	llxghqaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
lliisaq	k]7cz2	something (especially food) put aside for someone		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 lli-; = liisaq									check				something (especially food) put aside for someone	c]tcnyjt. jcnfdktyyjt lkz rjuj-k> 			Rub. 305		llisaq	llxsaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
lliivneqegsagh-	k]7dys2s[cz3-	flatten the surface of something		liivneqegsaghluku nuna tiintat nekegteki \'91flatten the ground and set up the tent\'92													to flatten the surface of something				CK A & W 44		llivneqegsagh-	llxvneqegsagh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1074 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1187 -\
lliivneqegtaq	k]7dys2s[nf2	flat surface (usually, of a rock)		uyghagem qaaynga lliivneqegtaq llivikigu \'91put something on the flat top surface of that rock\'92													flat surface (usually, of a rock)				CK A & W 44		llivneqegtaq	llxvneqegtaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1074 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
llilagh-	k]bkf4-	command to go somewhere		apeghtughaaghluku taaqsamigu llilaghaa \'91after he taught him thoroughly, he sent him out\'92; nuuk unaksaghqaq taaga llilaghaa \'91he chased away the surfaced seal that was to have been caught\'92	send (a person) somewhere	chase away (an animal)											to command to go somewhere; to send (a person) somewhere; to chase away (an animal)		PE t0li-		CK A & W 44, Rub 305		llilagh-	llilagh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1083 \u1072 \u1271 -\
llilegh-	k]bks4-	have more than what is needed		pinaqneghutmeggneng quunpeng llileghluteng ayuqaqut \'91because of their aggressiveness, they always have more than what they need\'92													to have more than what is needed				CK A & W 44		llilegh-	llilegh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
llimtaaq	k]bvn62	something stored away for the future			stored away (something ~ for the future)				.161117250114								something stored away for the future		< lli-?-				llimtaq	llimtxq	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
llineghllugte-	k]bys5k]e5ns-	place something somewhere and forget where it was placed		llineghllugtaa \'91he misplaced it\'92 / igani llineghlluglluki ivanghiighutii \'91having forgotten where she placed her book she looked all over for it\'92; iganka navek llineghllugsimaanka \'91I have misplaced my book\'92	misplace												to place something somewhere and forget where it was placed; to misplace		< lli-neghllug(te)-		CK A & W 44 CK 		llineghllugte-	llineghllugte-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
llinghinaghmeng	k]by4byf4vs3	with only moderate strength, tension or effort		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  iighsuutet wiin llinghinaghmeng nengteki \'91stretch the pulley only slightly (for now)\'92	lightly												with only moderate strength, tension or effort; lightly		< lii-neq\super 1\nosupersub -(ng)inaq-
\f2\i ablative-modalis				
\f0\i0 llinghinaghmeng	llinghinaghmeng	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \
llivegh-	k]bds4-	inter		lliivghaa yugem taghnughhani tuqukaq \'91the man buried his dead child\'92	bury												to inter; to bury		PE 0@iv03 (under PE 0@i-)				llivegh-	llivegh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 -\
llivelghaq	k]bdsk4f2	shelf		
\f2\i may be used in the dual
\f0\i0 , llivelghak,
\f2\i  for one shelf													
\f0\i0 shelf		< lliveq-lghaq				llivelghaq	llivelghaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
lliveq	k]bds2	grave		lliivghet \'91graves, graveyard\'92					.1611033614								grave		PE 0@iv03 (under PE 0@i-); < lli-?-				lliveq	lliveq	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \
llivike-	k]bdbrs-	pay		llivikaa \'91he paid him\'92, \'91he put something on it\'92, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he got even with him\'92 / Asengenka qamaglluki 
\f2\i llivikanka
\f0\i0 . \'91I 
\f2\i paid
\f0\i0  all my bills.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 34); Piitesghaghmeng 
\f2\i llivikagka
\f0\i0  tuqukam salngagkek. \'91He 
\f2\i put
\f0\i0  flowers on the coffin of the one who died.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 86)	place something on (it)	get even with (him)			.161103111336								to pay; to place something on (it); to get even with (him)	gjufifnm ljku	< lli-vike-		CK V & E 138 (Russ voc)		llivike-	llivike-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
lluqwaaq	k]/2162	alaria			
\f2\i Alaria sp.												
\f0\i0 alaria 
\f2\i (Alaria sp.)				
\f0\i0 from Aynganga\'92s article in Beringia		lluqwaq	lluqwxq	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
lluu-	k]0-	sling (use a ~ as in hunting)		lluuguq \'91he used a sling\'92; lluugaa \'91he used a sling against it (target, game animal)\'92 / lluuluku \'91(after) using a sling on it\'92					.1639								to use a sling as in hunting		PE 0tlu(3)(-)				llu-	llx-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 -\
lluu, lluuq	k]0. k]02	sling for hunting		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 lluuk
\f2\i , for one sling					
\f0\i0 .1639								sling for hunting		PE 0tlu(3)(-)				llu, lluq	llx, llxq	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 , \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1179 \
Lluughraq	\uc0\u730 ]84hf2	Lorino in Chukotka (north of main (Central Siberian) Yupik area)		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Lorino in Chukotka (north of main (Central Siberian) Yupik area)						Llughraq	Llxghraq	\uc0\u1051 \u1100 \u1263 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
Lluughvik	K]04dbr	April		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time of hunting with a sling\'92; 
\f2\i also given in various sources as 
\f0\i0 March, March-April, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  May					.163905031113								April		< lluu-vik				Llughvik	Llxghvik	\uc0\u1051 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
lluukegkaq	k]0rs[rf2	something caught with a sling		lluuquyaghluni lluukegkani tugullghisimakanga \'91he went out hunging with a sling, and he didn\'92t retrieve what he caught with his sling\'92	sling (something caught with a ~)	caught (something ~ with a sling)											something caught with a sling		< lluu-?-(g)kaq		CK A & W 44		llukegkaq	llxkegkaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
lluuqu-	k]02e-	hunt with a sling			sling (hunt with a ~)												to hunt with a sling		< lluu-qu\super 1\nosupersub -				lluqu-	llxqu-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1179 \u1091 -\
Lluuquvik	K]82edbr	Shlokovik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Shlokovik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		< lluuqu-vik				Lluquvik	Llxquvik	\uc0\u1051 \u1100 \u1263 \u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
lluuquyagh-	k]/2eqf4-	go bird-hunting with a sling		ugavek sukilpaanun lluuquyaq qawiimalghii \'91the person who went hunting with a sling for auklets, caught a lot of birds\'92; lluuquyaghluni lluukengumalghii \'91he went hunting with a sling and caught something\'92													to go bird-hunting with a sling		< lluuqu-yagh-		CK A & W 44		lluquyagh-	llxquyagh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1072 \u1271 -\
lluuyaq	k]0z2	gyrfalcon		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  lluu	
\f2\i Falco rusticolus				
\f0\i0 .16394014								gyrfalcon (Falco rusticolus)						lluyaq	llxyaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1103 \u1179 \
lughtughaq	k/5ne4f2	fish (small shiny ~ type)		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; 
\f0\i0 = nughtughaq	smelt				.1539302526050114				better identification needed				small shiny fish type; smelt						lughtughaq	lughtughaq	\uc0\u1083 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
lugtu	k/[ne	lava type															type of lava				SLI Cur. Res. Man.		lugtu	lugtu	\uc0\u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \
luufsagh-	k0acf4-	fix something or someone up		luufsaghtuq \'91he fixed himself up\'92; luufsaghaa \'91he fixed it up\'92 /	nice (make something or someone look ~)	smooth out			.153928240105					presentable (make ~)			to fix something up; to make something or someone look nice; to smooth out; to make presentable				CK A & W 44 on 3rd gloss		lufsagh-	lxfsagh-	\uc0\u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1092 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 -\
luuq	k02	edge of a large expanse of shorefast or moving moving ice		
\f2\i dual, 
\f0\i0 luughek, 
\f2\i used for one such edge; see item 33 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												edge of a large expanse of shorefast or moving ice						luq	lxq	\uc0\u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1179 \
luuraq	k0hf2	in case		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Amen nunamnun aglaghnaanghitunga. 
\f2\i Luuraqlu
\f0\i0  nunamnun kaaskuma ugima tuqulleqanga. \'91See, I won't go to my hometown. 
\f2\i It might be
\f0\i0  that if I go home, my husband will kill me.\'92 (UNGIPAGH. 11); Atkugmeng kelqegkaalghiinga, allightemeng, ayapghaatameng 
\f2\i luuraq
\f0\i0  naalkuskumta aasightuusighqameng. \'91I brought a parka, boot insulation and mittens so that 
\f2\i in case
\f0\i0  we find people, we can dress them.\'92 (PANGEGH. 54)	might (maybe)	maybe			.1539230114					perhaps			in case; might; maybe; perhaps		from Chukchi lureq \'91maybe\'92				luraq	lxraq	\uc0\u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
maaghaghte-	v64f5ns-	run out of something quickly		nengiisaghqaayalghii tugulaamakangat ilateng maaghaghlluki \'91he was supposed to get a share, but they all took a lot and they didn\'92t leave any for him\'92	finish up something quickly	leave none for others purposely											to run out of or finish up something quickly; to purposely leave none for others				CK A & W 46		maghaghte-	mxghaghte-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maaghraghvinlek	v64hf4dbyksr	seven															seven		
\f2\i a ompound of 
\f0\i0 maalghuk \'91two\'92, 
\f2\i with 
\f0\i0 l 
\f2\i changed to 
\f0\i0 r, 
\f2\i and metathesis , and 
\f0\i0 aghvinlek \'91six\'92,
\f2\i  from 
\f0\i0 aghvigh- \'91to cross (from one hand to the other)\'94				maghraghvinlek	mxghraghvinlek	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \

\fs20 Maaghraghvinlek aghneq	V64hf4dbyksr f4ys2	
\fs24 Saturday		
\f2\i from Saturday being the seventh day of the week													
\f0\i0 Saturday		< maaghraghvinlek + aghneq			xxxa	Maghraghvinlek aghneq	Mxghraghvinlek aghneq	\uc0\u1052 \u257 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082  \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
maaghsiq	v65cb2	kelp type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined									
\f0\i0 more exact identification needed				kind of kelp				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 61		maghsiq	mxghsiq	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
maakeste-	v6rscns-	whip until thicky and/or fluffy		eslevaganeghmeggni aghnat maakesniiqiit igughhneghata \'91when women make a dish out of salmon-eggs, they say that they whip it with seal oil until it thickens to the right consistency\'92	set something upright												to whip until thick and/or fluffy; to set something upright		+ PE mak0- (cf. Central Yup\'92ik makkaq \'91stiff Eskimo ice cream\'92; Seward Pen. Inupiaq ma!0-  \'91stand up (grain of wood), be whipped fluffy\'92)		CK A & W 46		makeste-	mxkeste-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maakumiu	v6rev7	local resident															local resident		< maaku(t)-mii				makumiu	mxkumiu	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1251 \
maakut	v6ren	these		
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  maana													these						makut	mxkut	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \
maalghuggaaghte-	v6k4e[65ns-	two (be the only ~ remaining)		maalghuggaaghtuk \'91they\'92ve become the only two left\'92													to be the only two remaining		< maalghug-ghhaq-(ng)ughte-				malghuggaghte-	mxlghuggxghte-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1093 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maalghuk	v6k4er	two		
\f2\i the word 
\f0\i0 maalghuk 
\f2\i is a dual, but the singular, 
\f0\i0 maalghu, 
\f2\i can also occur as in: 
\f0\i0 tightughyaqminiki Uuleghmiit taakut 
\f2\i maalghu
\f0\i0  sangwaa ataasiq laluramketillegraak uugtaataqayuk Pedersen-kun. \'91When he read them [the letters] he observed that one, maybe 
\f2\i two.
\f0\i0  of those Uelen people could handle English having gone onboard with [Capt.] Pedersen.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:144); 
\f2\i also, the plural,
\f0\i0  maalghut, 
\f2\i can occur as in: Maalghut
\f0\i0  usikaataghaput ataasikun quyngikun, 150 pound-et coal-et ataasit. \'91We would transport 
\f2\i two
\f0\i0  150-pound apiece lots of coal with one reindeer [trip].\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:76); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 maaghraghvinlek													two		< malghug-				malghuk	mxlghuk	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \
maallgute-	v6k][ens-	trapped (get ~ by ice when boating)		maallgusaaghiisi taglaghtuullghaasi \'91be careful, don\'92t get trapped (by the ice), come to land now\'92; angyannguq unga maallgusimii \'91they say the boat is closed in by ice out there\'92													to get trapped in ice when boating		< malleg-(u)te-		CK A & W 46 CK 		mallgute-	mxllgute-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maalliqun	v6k]b2ey	despite things being the way they are		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Piiqegkenka panigenka, 
\f2\i maalliqun
\f0\i0  piniqsaliighllagaanga qavngaq ugumikeghllaglunga. \'91I tell my daughters that 
\f2\i despite those things at last
\f0\i0  she feels quite positive towards me (now) whereas she once despised me.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:90); Pimakanga, "
\f2\i Maalliqun
\f0\i0  whanga piiqaghhnaaghyukaghpenga." Ii, aghuliiqaghlluni uutqaghtuq. \'91He said, \'93
\f2\i ha-ha, 
\f0\i0 you didn\'92t catch me!\'92 But then it stopped and turned back!\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:172)	anyway	serves him right!								at last			despite things being the way they are; anyway; serves him right!; at last		from Chukchi ?	x			malliqun	mxlliqun	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
maam-	v6v-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > maamkelli-, maamkestaaq, maamtu-															PE mam0- (?)				mam-	mxm-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1084 -\
maame-	v6vs-	heal (of wound)		maamuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  maamaa \'91it healed\'92 / kililqa maamuq \'91my cut healed\'92; maamtaa \'91he closed it in\'92; Kililqa itegamnilnguq 
\f2\i maamumaaq
\f0\i0 . \'91The cut on my foot 
\f2\i has healed
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 89); Segevneq sikumelnguq 
\f2\i maamaquq
\f0\i0 . \'91The crack in the ice 
\f2\i is freezing over
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 89)	close over												to heal (of wound); to close over		PE mam0-			; > maamelleq, maamnalghii	mame-	mxme-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1099 -\
maamelleq	v6vsk]s2	scar															scar		< maame-lleq				mamelleq	mxmelleq	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
maamghu-	v6v4e-	fix temporarily or in a make-shift way		qamiyngiilluni unaghsimeng teggusighlukek maamghulukek tagisiqumakek \'91when his sled broke, he used a stick for a make-shift repair for it, and then brought it home\'92; ayemellghet maamghuluki igleghtuq \'91he fixed the broken parts and left\'92													to fix temporarily or in a make-shift way		+PK mam0q \'91patch; repair\'92 (cf. CAY (Nunivak) mamr(aq*) \'91patch\'92)		CK A & W 46		mamghu-	mxmghu-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1271 \u1091 -\
maamkelli-	v6vrsk]b-	thinner (become or make ~)		maamkelliiq \'91it got thinner, narrower or calmer\'92; maamkellii \'91he made it thinner, narrower or calmer\'92 /	narrower (become or make ~)	calmer (become or make ~)											to become or make thinner, narrower or calmer		< maam-?-				mamkelli-	mxmkelli-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
maamkestaaq, maamkestaaghhaq*	v6vrscn62. v6vrscn65f2	thin thing		maamkestaaghhaaguq \'91it is thin or narrow\'92 /	narrow thing												thin thing; narrow thing		< maam-kestaaq				mamkestaq, mamkestaghhaq*	mxmkestxq, mxmkestxghhaq*	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 , \u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
maamnalghii	v6vyfk47	dressing for wounds			healing aid												dressing for wounds; something that helps a wound to heal		< maame-naq-lghii				mamnalghi	mxmnalghx	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
maamsa	v6vcz	pancreas															pancreas		PE mamca(3)				mamsa	mxmsa	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \
maamtawha	v6vnf[1f	again		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  taghnughhaat mangteghamun mayughtuullaataghtut; maamtawhanguq ineghtiit \'91 the children climbd up onto the house again; again they were told not to do that\'92	not again												again; not again		from Chukchi ?	x	Akiingqwaghneghet 112		mamtawha	mxmtawha	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1265 \u1072 \
maamtu-	v6vne-	thick (be ~)		maamtuuq \'91it is thick or wide\'92 / maamtuqaq \'91thick or wide thing\'92; Ayveghem amiirii kiightellghilluteng 
\f2\i maamtuqat
\f0\i0 . \'91Unsplit walrus hide is quite 
\f2\i thick
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 89); Angyanghitukut sallek 
\f2\i maamtupigtuq
\f0\i0 . \'91We didn\'92t go hunting because the young ice was too 
\f2\i wide
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 89)	wide (be ~)												to be thick or wide		< maam-tu-				mamtu-	mxmtu-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1090 \u1091 -\
maana	v6yf	this one or this kind		
\f2\i base: 
\f0\i0 ma<t>-; 
\f2\i extended demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun:
\f0\i0  matum \'91(of) this one\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 maakut \'91these\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric pronoun: 
\f0\i0 tamana (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tamaana) \'91this very one\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  maani \'91here, in this place\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb: 
\f0\i0 maavek \'91to here\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb
\f0\i0 : maagun \'91through here\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb: 
\f0\i0 maaken \'91from here\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional:
\f0\i0  maa \'91here!, here it is!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 tamani (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tamaani) \'91here, in this very place\'92; 
\f2\i as a particle: 
\f0\i0 maana \'91end of quote\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91on to the next part\'92, \'91and then\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric adverbial base with 3s possessor: 
\f0\i0 tamaanganun \'91to around there\'92, tamaanganeng \'91from around here\'92	here (the one ~)	on to the next part 								then (and ~)			this one; this kind; this one here; on to the next part; and then		PE dem. ma9-				mana	mxna	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1085 \u1072 \
maangnaqe-	v63yfs-	try to soothe (a crying baby)															to try to soothe (a crying baby)				VK\'92s notes		mangnaqe-	mxngnaqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1187 \u1085 \u1072 \u1099 -\
maangnaqi-	v63yf2b-	try to stop a child from crying		maangnaqim taghnughhateng kevgaaghumiita ilagaataqegkangit \'91they carry them and sing to the children when they are crying to help them stop crying\'92; maangniqem sayaghqani pinghitii \'91he was trying to stop a child from crying, so he didn\'92t do what he had been going to do\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 mangigh-													to try to stop a child from crying				CK A & W 46		mangnaqi-	mxngnaqi-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1187 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1080 -\
maantek\'92ri	v6ynsrhb	gun, small caliber		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 small caliber gun	vtkrjrfkb,thyjt he;mt	from English \'91Monte Cristo\'92 (type of gun)	Chuk.	CK V & E 109		mantekri	mxntekri	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1085 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1088 \u1080 \
maapi-	v6gb-	here (to come ~ (to this general area))		
\f2\i Maapiighaatalleghput
\f0\i0  liisimakaqa. 
\f2\i Maapiluta
\f0\i0  aglaghaqluta piighaataqani. \'91I remember how we\'92d go there and 
\f2\i come
\f0\i0  
\f2\i here
\f0\i0 . We used to go there and 
\f2\i come here
\f0\i0  again.\'92  (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:66)													to come here (to this general area)		< maa(ni)-?-				mapi-	mxpi-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1087 \u1080 -\
maaqe-	v62s-	drain out		maaquq \'91it flowed or oozed out\'92 / maaqestaa \'91he let it flow, drained it\'92	ooze	flow								run (of liquids)			to drain out; to ooze; to flow; to run (of liquids)		PE maq0-				maqe-	mxqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 -\
maaqelleq	v62sk]s2	current in ocean		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 maaqellghek, 
\f2\i for the current													
\f0\i0 current in ocean		< maaqe-lleq\super 1				\nosupersub maqelleq	mxqelleq	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
maaqfik	v62abr	faucet			pipe (for liquid)												faucet; pipe (for liquid)		< maaqe-vik				maqfik	mxqfik	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1179 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \
maaqiite-	v627ns-	lightly dressed (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 dressed lightly (be ~)								check; given as maaqiilnguq \'91lightly dressed\'92				to be lightly dressed	kturj jltnsq			Rub. 313		maqite-	mxqxte-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1179 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maaqneq	v62y]s2	ocean current  flowing from southwest to northeast		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  maaqneghek,
\f2\i  for the current; 
\f0\i0 Upenghami 
\f2\i maaqneghek
\f0\i0  iknaquughqaaghllakayugek. \'91In springtime the (north) 
\f2\i current
\f0\i0  gets very strong.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 90)	current (ocean ~  flowing from southwest to northeast)												ocean current flowing from southwest to northeast		< maaqe-neq\super 2				\nosupersub maqneq	mxqneq	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
maaqute-	v62ens-	drift by with the current		maaqutaa \'91it (the current) carried it or him away\'92	current carries one away (as in a boat)												to drift by with the current; for the current to carry one away (as in a boat)		< maaqe-(u)te-				maqute-	mxqute-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maaqutelleq	v62ensk]s2	mud in water		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  maaqutelleghtuqaq naayvaq \'91muddy lake\'92													mud in water		< maaqute-lleq		CK Rub 313		maqutelleq	mxqutelleq	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
maasisu	v6cbc/	even		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  = masisu; 
\f2\i questioned	
\f0\i0 however	already								moreover			even; however; already; moreover		from Chukchi mecic\'92u \'91besides\'92				masisu	mxsisu	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1089 \u1102 \
maaste-	v6cns-	penetrated by the cold air  or wind (be ~)		aatkii ugmestaaghhaat sukalluni maastaa \'91his clothing was so thin that it was quickly penetrated by the wind\'92													to be penetrated by the cold air or wind	ghjledfnm. ghj,bhfnm yfcrdjpm			CK V & K 173; Rub 320		maste-	mxste-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maataghniimna	v6nf4y7vyf	that one, the same one		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; this looks like an odd blend of maaten and iimna				that one, the same one	njn ;t. \'e6njn ;t	<maat(en) + iimna
\f2\i  (compound word)		
\f0\i0 Rub. 321		mataghnimna	mxtaghnxmna	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
maateghhaq	v6ns5f2	short while ago		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 maateghhaq neghtunga \'91I just now ate\'92	just now	now (just ~)								here (right around ~)			a short while ago; just now; right around here	ytvyjuj gjujlz	< maaten-ghhaq		CK V & E 125 (Russ Voc)		mateghhaq	mxteghhaq	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
maateghniineng	vfns4ybys3	since a while ago		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 since a while ago	gj chfdytyb/ c ytlfdybv dhtvtytv	< maaten-?-
\f2\i ablative-modalis		
\f0\i0 CK V & E 125, CK		mateghnineng	mxteghnxneng	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \
maateghniistun	v6ns4y7cney	same as a while ago		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 the same as a while ago		< maaten-?-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 mateghnistun	mxteghnxstun	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
maaten	v6nsy	now		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 little while ago												now; a little while ago	ctqxfc. ntgthm\\ ctujlyz	PE ma90t0n; < maa(na)-
\f2\i equalis		
\f0\i0 CK V & E 125 (rus Vocab)	; > maatenllaam, maatenta	maten	mxten	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \
maaten ilangani	v6nsy bk93fyb	one time			on one occasion												on one occasion; one time		< maaten + ila-
\f2\i possessed localis			
\f0\i0 xxxi	maten ilangani	mxten ilangani	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085  \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
maatenllaam	v6nsyk]9v	this time for sure															this time for sure		< maaten-?				matenllam	mxtenllxm	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1084 \
maatenta	v6nsynf	now you see!			there you have it!	I told you so!								just told you (I ~)			now you see!; there you have it!; I told you so!; I just told you		< maaten=ta				matenta	mxtenta	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \
maateqwaaqun	v6ns2162ey	little while from now		Tengegkayuget 
\f2\i maateqwaaqun
\f0\i0  kaallequt. \'91The airplane will arrive 
\f2\i in a little while
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 90)	shortly												a little while from now; shortly		< maaten-?-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 mateqwaqun	mxteqwxqun	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
maaterugpak	v6nshe[gfr	ago (quite a while ~)															quite a while ago		< maaten-ruk-ghpak				materugpak	mxterugpak	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
maatkagh-	v6nrf4-	clear up ( ~ after blizzard)		maatkaghyalghiimi uga mangteghatlu aliightut \'91when it suddenly cleared up, the houses appeared\'92; llaaghinaan maatkaqaghaa, igleghneqa naallghutaqa \'91good thing it cleared up as I can now correct my course\'92													to suddenly clear up after blizzard				CK A & W 46, VK		matkagh-	mxtkagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
maatnegh-	v6ny]s4-	warm (be ~ )		maatneghtuq \'91it is warm\'92 / maatneghtaa \'91he warmed it\'92													to be warm						matnegh-	mxtnegh-	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 -\
maatneghsiisiq	v6ny]s5c7cb2	heater			radiator (heat ~)												heater; heat radiator		< maatnegh-sigh-(u)siq		from SLI JR. DICT. p. 166		matneghsisiq	mxtneghsxsiq	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
maatneq	v6ny]s2	warmth															warmth		PY-S matn0q				matneq	mxtneq	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
maavesngwaaq	v6dsc3]162	fog, heavy		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 maavek (
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 maana)													heavy fog				CK Rub 209		mavesngwaq	mxvesngwxq	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1187 \u1100 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
maayghaaq	v6q462	bark of tree			hollow end of walrus tusk												bark of tree; hollow end of walrus tusk		< maya-?		2nd gloss from CK A & W 46		mayghaq	mxyghxq	\uc0\u1084 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b ma\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vf\super s	\nosupersub voice		menga \'91his voice\'92; \'85 tawaten 
\f2\i mem
\f0\i0  taghtughtaqegkanga, piiqegkangat \'93Kii, aghnaghaghhaq una igamsiqanaghhalek nangllegtapigta\'94 \'91\'85 the 
\f2\i voice
\f0\i0  awakened her as they were saying, \'93My goodness! How grateful we should be for her kindness.\'94\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:198); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nepiiq													voice		PE 0m0			; > mengghaalugraaq, mengwaak, mengyaq; 	ma	ma	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
maghaq	vf4f2	marshy area															marshy area		PE ma33a3				maghaq	maghaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
maghhuurka	vf58irf	leaf tobacco		An'giisimaluki igaghvigem manughaani, melugutaqun'nguq 
\f2\i maghhuurkameng
\f0\i0 , \'85 aqumuulluteng ilangi. \'91When they were outside taking a break in front of the school, they were smoking 
\f2\i Russian tobacco
\f0\i0 , \'85 sitting there, some of them.\'91 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:208)	tobacco (leaf ~)												leaf tobacco		from Russian vf[jhrf (makhorka), a low-grade type of tobacco				maghhurka	maghhxrka	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1263 \u1096 \u1082 \u1072 \
maghlag-	vf4kzu-	invite to the dance floor during a particular indigenous Eskimo dance event held yearly followed by a gift exchange		
\f2\i done by cross-cousins	
\f0\i0 dance (invite to the ~ floor during a particular indigenous Eskimo dance event held yearly followed by a gift exchange)												to invite to the dance floor during a particular indigenous Eskimo dance event held yearly followed by a gift exchange		PE ma3la!-		VK		maghlag-	maghlag-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 -\
maghlak	vf4kzr	gift exchange ceremony after a particular Eskimo dance event held yearly		
\f2\i involves bringing a cross-cousin to the floor to dance													
\f0\i0 gift exchange ceremony after a particular Eskimo dance event held yearly		PE ma3la!-				maghlak	maghlak	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \
maghqate-	vf52fns-	lock up		maghqatuq \'91it locked up\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he locked up\'92; maghqataa \'91he locked it up\'92 / maghqatngaaq \'91it is locked up, closed for the day (business or office)\'92													to lock up						maghqate-	maghqate-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maghqatusiq	vf52fnecb2	lock		
\f2\i dual, 
\f0\i0 maghqatusik, 
\f2\i used for one lock; 
\f0\i0 Mangteghaghput 
\f2\i maghqatusilighaqa
\f0\i0  amigakun. \'91I put a 
\f2\i padlock
\f0\i0  on the door of our house.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 95)	padlock												lock; padlock		< maghqate-(u)siq				maghqatusiq	maghqatusiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
maghuyugte-	vf4e/[ns-	tuck lower part of face in one's garments		done to ward off the cold or because of shyness or sadness; Ilangani ghhuunnemta 
\f2\i maghuyugtaqukut
\f0\i0 . \'91Sometime when we are cold we 
\f2\i tuck our faces inside our coats
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 90)													to tuck lower part of face in one's garments						maghuyugte-	maghuyugte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maghyagh-	vf4mz4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > maghyaghaghqugh-, maghyaghqugh-; = meghyagh-															PY-S ma3ya3-				maghyagh-	maghyagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
maghyaghaghqugh-	vf4mz4f52e4-	lead astray		maghyaghaghqughaa \'91he led him into mischief\'92													to lead astray		< maghyagh-?-				maghyaghaghqugh-	maghyaghaghqugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
maghyaghqelliin	vf4mz52sk]7y	food that is eaten first		neghnaqelghiini sivukluki neghyaghqat maghyaghqelliitmeng nalighmen sivullughquutmeng aatqelghiit \'91at meal time, food that is eaten first is called \'93lead course\'94 or \'93first course\'94\'92	first course at a meal												food that is eaten first; first course at a meal				CK A & W 47		maghyaghqellin	maghyaghqellxn	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1085 \
maghyaghqugh-	vf4mz52e4-	lead (opposite of follow)		maghyaghqughtuq \'91he lead\'92; maghyaghqughii \'91he lead them\'92 / Elpek liisimakan tuma, 
\f2\i maghyaghqughqut
\f0\i0 . \'91You know the wqay, so go ahead and 
\f2\i lead
\f0\i0  us.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 46)													to lead		< maghyagh-qugh-				maghyaghqugh-	maghyaghqugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
maghyaghqughsiin	vf4mz52e5c7y	towline of sled going all the way to the lead dog		maghyaghqughsiin qikmiin kepumakanga \'91his dogs cut the towline\'92													towline of sled going all the way to the lead dog		< maghyaghqugh-sigh-(u)n		CK A & W 47; Rub 309		maghyaghqughsin	maghyaghqughsxn	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1085 \
maghyaghqughta	vf4mz52e5nf	leader			lead dog												leader; lead dog		< maghyaghqugh-(s)ta				maghyaghqughta	maghyaghqughta	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
maka	vfrf	diaper or diaper-like thing		Neghnam aghnaanghan 
\f2\i makaatangan
\f0\i0  asingi eslevagmeng imaqeftut. \'91Under the female crab\'92s 
\f2\i sack
\f0\i0  there were eggs.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 91)													diaper or diaper-like thing		PE makka3-				maka	maka	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \
maka-	vfrf-	diaper		makaa \'91he put a diaper on him\'92													to diaper						maka-	maka-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 -\
makasitaq	vfrfcbnf2	diaper cover															diaper cover		< maka-?-(u)taq				makasitaq	makasitaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
makete-	vfrsns-	stand up		maketuq \'91he got up\'92; maketaa \'91he put it upright\'92 / maketen \'91get up!\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 makiga-	get up	up (get or stand ~)								stand (it) upright			to stand up; to get up; to stand (it) upright		PE mak0t-				makete-	makete-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
makiga-	vfrbuf-	erect (be in an ~ state or condition)		makigaaq \'91it is upright\'92 / kiti nevaan ifkaghtekuvgu makigaghmi tekillequq \'91if you drop a cat upside down, it will land upright\'92; makigaan lligu ulleghnayukan \'91place it upright in case it falls\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  makete-	upright (be in an ~ state or condition)												to be in an upright or erect state or condition						makiga-	makiga-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 -\
makigh-	vfrb4-	gnaw on a bone with meat attached to it		makightuq \'91he or it gnawed on something\'92; makighaa \'91he or it gnawed on it\'92 / Neghsam tulimakek maalghuk 
\f2\i makighagka
\f0\i0 . \'91I 
\f2\i ate the meat
\f0\i0  from two seal ribs.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 91)													to gnaw on a bone with meat attached to it		PY-S maki3-				makigh-	makigh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1271 -\
makiigh-	vfr74-	split following the grain (of wood)		qamiskama suqaghneghaqaa makiighyan atughhneghitaqa \'91when the runner for my sled to-be started to split I didn\'92t use it\'92; sayugagma esnekek makiighaqeftuk \'91the rim of my drum happens to be splitting\'92													to split following the grain (of wood)				CK A & W 47		makigh-	makxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1251 \u1271 -\
makilleq	vfrbk]s2	bone from which meat has all been picked or gnawed															bone from which meat has all been picked or gnawed		< makigh-lleq		VK		makilleq	makilleq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
makiq	vfrb2	bone with meat on it															bone with meat on it				VK		makiq	makiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1179 \
makislak	vfrbck]zr	bearded seal, small		
\f2\i its skin is used for boot soles and its face is somewhat reddish; cf. 
\f0\i0 maklak	seal (small bearded ~)	
\f2\i Erignathus barbatus 
\f0\i0 (bearded seal) small											small bearded seal 
\f2\i (Erignathus barbatus)						
\f0\i0 makislak	makislak	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
makite-	vfrbns-	place one\'92s tail between ones legs		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to place one\'92s tail between ones legs				CK Rub 310		makite-	makite-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maklagu	vfrk]zue	intestines of bearded seal		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 maklagut,
\f2\i  for the intestines of one seal; 
\f0\i0  Maklagut saghnaaqsaqangit qaliiluki ama aghsughtaaluki. \'91People used to save bearded seal intestines for making raincoats or bleached gut wind jackets.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 91)													intestines of bearded seal		< maklak-?				maklagu	maklagu	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \
maklak	vfrk]zr	bearded seal, adult		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  makislak	seal, bearded, adult	
\f2\i Erignathus barbatus 
\f0\i0 (bearded seal) adult											adult bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus)		PE makla!				maklak	maklak	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
Maklak	vfrk]zr	site in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka				Men. 1972, 1075		maklak	maklak	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
maklawaaq	vfrk]z162	caterpillar		
\f4 \'85 
\f6\i maklawaaghem
\f4\i0   tugumaa.  Nenglunga inga, meghem esnenganituq.  Nunaaghem  aghnaa qerngughsimaa 
\f6\i maklawaaghem
\f4\i0 . \'91\'85 the 
\f6\i caterpillar
\f4\i0  had taken her. Its house was there by the shore of the sea. The 
\f6\i caterpillar
\f4\i0  had gathered [into captivity] the women of the camp.\'92 (MATERIALY 443);
\f6\i literally, 
\f4\i0 'pretend bearded seal, thing like a bearded seal'; 
\f6\i cf. similar idiom in Central Yup\'92ik, where
\f4\i0  \'91caterpillar\'92 
\f6\i is
\f4\i0  
\f0 u!u!uaq
\f4  
\f6\i from Inupiaq
\f4\i0  
\f0 u!$uk 
\f4 \'91bearded seal\'92 
\f6\i (or an obsolete Yupik cognate thereof); 													
\f0\i0 caterpillar		< maklak-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				maklawaq	maklawxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
maklegsaq	vfrk]s[cz2	snare for seagulls															snare for seagulls						maklegsaq	maklegsaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
makligha-	vfrk]b4f-	pull in a rope hand-over-hand		maklighaaq \'91he shinnied up or down; he checked a net\'92 / maklighaghaa \'91he shinnied up or down it; he checked it\'92	shinny up or down a rope or pole	check a net pulling it in hand-over-hand								get eggs on a cliff climbing down on a rope			to pull in a rope hand-over-hand or check to net this way; to shinny up or down a rope or pole; to get eggs on a cliff down on a rope						makligha-	makligha-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 -\
maklii-	vfrk]7-	butcher or otherwise prepare bearded seal		makliiguq \'91he butchered bearded seal\'92 /													to butcher or otherwise prepare bearded seal		 < maklak-ii-				makli-	maklx-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 -\
maklu	vfrk]/	atmosphere (intermediate level of ~, without much air)			intermediate level of atmosphere, without much air												intermediate level of atmosphere, without much air						maklu	maklu	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
maklukestaq	vfrk]/rscnf2	sea ice surface covered with small smooth bumps, suitable for hunting and traveling but causing boat and sled to vibrate when pulled across it		
\f2\i see item 34 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004													surface of sea ice covered with small smooth bumps, suitable for hunting and traveling but causing boat and sled to vibrate when pulled across it						maklukestaq	maklukestaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b makreg-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vfrisu-\super \'a1	\nosupersub peel (off)		makregtuq \'91it peeled or peeled off; its peel came off; it shed its covering\'92 / makregtaa \'91he peeled it\'92; makregutuq \'91he peeled something\'92; Piineluk 
\f2\i makregtuq
\f0\i0  mangtegham minglenganeng. \'91 The old paint 
\f2\i is peeling
\f0\i0  off from the walls of the old house.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 91); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  makete-	shed covering, skin, etc.	strip off skin or the like											to peel; to peel (off); to shed covering, skin, etc.; to strip off skin or the like						makreg-1	makreg-1	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1075 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub makreg-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vfrisu-\super \'99	\nosupersub anguish (suffer ~)															to suffer anguish						makreg-2	makreg-2	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1075 -\super 2\
\nosupersub makregaghte-	vfrisuf5ns-	abrasions (cause elevated ~)			scrape one\'92s skin on something												to cause elevated abrasions; to scrape one\'92s skin on something	ccflbyf. wfhfgbyf	< makreg-?-		Rub. 311; SLI JR. DICT. 148		makregaghte-	makregaghte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
makrughi-	vfrie4b-	difficult (have a ~ time doing something)															to have a difficult time doing something				VK\'92s notes		makrughi-	makrughi-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 -\
makruughi-	vfri84b-	hard time (have a ~ doing something)		kaasaqegka unangneghmeng makruughiiqeftuq nuugllagmi imani \'91when I got to him, he was having a hard time getting a seal even though there were so many\'92; makruughiyama qenwat iilqayugtunga \'91when I couldn\'92t do it, I finally gave up\'92	unable to do something difficult (be ~)								the doubled u is from VK				to have a hard time doing something; to be unable to do something difficult		+ PY mak$u!- or mak$u3- \'91have a hard time\'92 (cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik makuxt0- \'91have a hard time\'92)		CK A & W 47; VK		makrughi-	makrxghi-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1096 \u1263 \u1271 \u1080 -\
maksagaq	vfrczuf2	walrus, young, with small tusks		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 young walrus with small tusks				CK Rub 311		maksagaq	maksagaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
maksulqaghhiite-	vfrc/k]2f57ns-	no sign of human living (show ~)		nunaaghmelgnguut naghughtaput angyameng maksulqaghhiilnguut entaqun qavaatnguut \'91the people at the camp that we passed by in the boat showed no sign of their presence, probably all being asleep\'92; nunavaget maksulqaghhiilnguut piyaqeput tuqukaperugwaaghet \'91the still, quiet herd of walrus on ice that we came to turned out to be all dead\'92	quiet and still (be ~)								is there a word maksulqaq \'91sign of life\'92 ? (the present word would then mean \'91to not have the slightest sign of life\'92); VK gives maksulqe- as a \'93root\'94 meaning \'91to be up and about\'92				to show no sign of living presence; to be quiet and still				CK A & W 47		maksulqaghhite-	maksulqaghhxte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
makughqugh-	vfre52e4-	unharness, unfasten, or otherwise undo dogs		makughqughtuq \'91he undid the dogs\'92; makughqughii \'91he undid them\'92 /													to unharness, unfasten, or otherwise undo dogs		< makugte-qugh-				makughqugh-	makughqugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
makugneq	vfreuys2	shed fur or hair of animal		qikmimta makugnegha mallaaghutuq ilunganilnguq \'91our dog\'92s hair that has been shedd is becoming messy  being inside (the house)\'92; teghigluget aqsamelluteng makugtaqelghiit enkaam makugneghtuumaghmeng aanaqut \'91baby bearded seals shed when they are in the womb still, so the shed hair comes out with the baby\'92													shed fur or hair of animal				CK A & W 47		makugneq	makugneq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
makugte-	vfre[ns-	shed		makugtuq \'91it shed; it slipped out\'92; makugtaa \'91he undid it (dog)\'92 / qikmiq makugutuq \'91the dog got loose, slipped out of its collar and tether\'92; Qimugsineng kaallunga qikmima qaghlungi 
\f2\i makughqughanka
\f0\i0 . \'91After arriving from driving the dogs I 
\f2\i slipped
\f0\i0  
\f2\i off
\f0\i0  my dogs\'92 harnesses.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 92); Unaaq elngaatall qilak 
\f2\i makugaghtaa
\f0\i0 . \'91The clouds suddenly 
\f2\i moved away
\f0\i0  this morning.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 92)	moult	slip out of a loop which holds one											to shed; to moult; to slip out of a loop which holds one		PE mak0- (?)				makugte-	makugte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
malghi	vfk4b	twin		malghik \'91pair of twins\'92; malghikaqa \'91he is my twin\'92													twin		< malghug-?; PE mal3i (under PE mal3u!)				malghi	malghi	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1080 \
malghi-	vfk4b-	birth (give ~ to twins)		malghiiq \'91she gave birth to twin\'92 /	twins (give birth to ~)												to give birth to twins		< malghi-i\super 2\nosupersub -				malghi-	malghi-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1080 -\
malghug-	vfk4eu-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > malghi, maaghraghvinlek, maalghuk, malghukaghte-, malghukli-, malghukuraaq, malghuuya-															PE mal3u!				malghug-	malghug-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1075 -\
malghughqe-	vfk4e52s-	act in pairs		malghughqelluteng angyaghtut \'91they divided up the boating crew into two\'92	divide in two	pairs (act in ~)											to act in pairs; to divide in two		< malghug-ghqe\super 1\nosupersub -				malghughqe-	malghughqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
malghugneq	vfk4euys2	two things or groups of things		
\f2\i used with a plural ending and therefore realized as 
\f0\i0 malghugneghet, malghugneghneng, 
\f2\i etc.; used to indicate two things, when the noun for that thing is used in the plural or dual even for a single entitity, or to indicate two groups (such as families), thus: Malghugneghet
\f0\i0  siifluki unkuset ataasikaghsimalghiit kaviighmeng. \'91Setting 
\f2\i two
\f0\i0  traps, [they] caught [one] fox.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 151; 
\f2\i note that dual, 
\f0\i0 unkusek, 
\f2\i is used for one 
\f0\i0 \'91trap\'92); Taakwagun, qamiyet 
\f2\i malghugneghet
\f0\i0 , \'85 \'91[For that first trip here] 
\f2\i two
\f0\i0  sleds [were used], \'85\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:156; 
\f2\i note that dual,
\f0\i0  qamiyek, 
\f2\i is used for one
\f0\i0  \'91sled\'92); Taakut pughileghmelnguut Agaankutlu, Anagutaankutlu 
\f2\i malghugneghet
\f0\i0 . \'91Only 
\f2\i two
\f0\i0  families were staying permanently at Southwest Cape, Agaq and family, and  Anagutaq and family.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:162)													two things; two groups		< malghu-gneq				malghugneq	malghugneq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
malghukaghte-	vfk4erf5ns-	act on things twice or two at a time		malghukaghtaan tunqughii \'91he gave them out two at a time\'92; malghukaghsimaaq kaviighmeng \'91he caught two foxes\'92	twice (act on things ~)	two at a time (act on things ~)											to act on things twice or two at a time		< malghug-?-				malghukaghte-	malghukaghte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
malghukli-	vfk4erk]b-	undecided (be ~)		malghukliiq \'91he is undecided\'92 / malghuklitkaa \'91he is undecided about it\'92													to be undecided		< malghug-?-				malghukli-	malghukli-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
malghukuraaq	vfk4ereh62	ship with two masts			two-masted ship												ship with two masts		< malghug-?-raaq				malghukuraq	malghukurxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
malghuutaq	vfk41nf2	share (each of two shares given separately)		nengiiskufsi malghuutaaluku nenginnakesi \'91when you are going to divide it, divide it into two, one for each person\'92; malghuutaaluteng nengitiinkung ighnequllghiigni \'91they gave me and my son separate shares\'92													each of two shares given separately (when one given for both would have sufficed)		< malghu-(u)taq		CK A & W 47		malghutaq	malghxtaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1265 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
malghuuya-	vfk48z-	twice (win ~ at one time (as in double-jumping in checkers))															to win twice at one time (as in double-jumping in checkers)		< malghuk-?-				malghuya-	malghxya-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1263 \u1103 -\
malghuuya-	vfk489-	twice in a row (do something ~)		Nayagama maalghugegneng 
\f2\i malghuuyalunga
\f0\i0  kayaalqaanga. \'91My sister beat me [at checkers] by doing it to me [jumping my men] 
\f2\i twice in a row
\f0\i0 , two times.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 92)													to do something twice in a row		< malghug-?-				malghuya-	malghxya-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1263 \u1103 \u772 -\
malig-	vfkbu-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > malighqagh-, malighqugh-, maligmun, maligsaagh-, maligte-															PE mali!-				malig-	malig-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 -\
malighqagh-	vfkb52f4-	chase after		Ullghitat aagkut 
\f2\i malgighqaghnaqanka
\f0\i0 . \'91I am going 
\f2\i to chase and try to catch up
\f0\i0  with those wheeled/tracked vehicles.\'92	catch up with by chasing												to chase after; to catch up with by chasing		PE mali3q0- (under PE mali!-); < malig-?-				malighqagh-	malighqagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
malighqugh-	vfkb52e4-	chase		malighqughtuq \'91he chased something\'92; malighqughaa \'91he chased it\'92 /													to chase		PE maliq9u3- (under PE mali!-); < malig-?-				malighqugh-	malighqugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
malighqutaama-	vfkb52ev6vf-	follow the rules always		malighqutaamatmineng piniqnighllak \'91due to his following of rules, he is a favorite\'92; nuyeklightaghpesinun malighutaamalusi \'91follow the ways of your elders\'92													to always follows the rules		< malighqugh-tagh\super 3\nosupersub -(i/u)ma-		CK A & W 48		malighqutama-	malighqutxma-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u257 \u1084 \u1072 -\
malighqutaq	vfkb52enf2	ripple		
\f2\i Chukokan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 swell (sea ~)												ripple; sea swell	ps,m yf vjht	cf. PI mal0k \'91wave\'92; < malig-?		CK V & E 41		malighqutaq	malighqutaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
maligmun	vfkbuvey	with the grain		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 following the common pattern	grain (with the ~)											with the grain; following the common pattern		< malig-
\f2\i terminalis				
\f0\i0 maligmun	maligmun	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
maligsaagh-	vfkb[c94-	follow along or follow the pattern		maligsaaghtuq \'91he went along with the others, followed the pattern\'92; maligsaaghaa \'91he followed him or it\'92 /													to follow along; to follow the pattern		< malig-?-			; > maligsaaghta, maligsaaghyaghqaq	maligsagh-	maligsxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
maligsaaghta	vfkb[c95nf	follower			disciple												follower; disciple		< maligsaagh-(s)ta				maligsaghta	maligsxghta	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
maligsaaghyaghqaq	vfkb[c94mz52f2	guide (book or the like)															guide (book or the like)		< maligsaagh-yaghqaq				maligsaghyaghqaq	maligsxghyaghqaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
maligte-, maligtagh-	vfkb[ns-. vfkb[nf4-	accompany		maligtaa \'91he went with him\'92 / maligutuq \'91he went along\'92	go with	follow											to accompany; to go with; to follow		< malig-?-				maligte-, maligtagh-	maligte-, maligtagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -, \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mallalghutaq	vfk]zk4enf2	trash container		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 mallalghutak,
\f2\i  for one container	
\f0\i0 garbage container												trash container; garbage container		< mallaq-lghutaq				mallalghutaq	mallalghutaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
mallan	vfk]zy	broom		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0   = aallgutaq													broom				CK Rub 315		mallan	mallan	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1085 \
mallangllagh-	vfk]z3k]z4-	litter (
\f2\i i.e.
\f0\i0 , strew debris)															to litter		< mallaq-ngllagh-		CK Rub 315		mallangllagh-	mallangllagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
mallaq	vfk]z2	dust			debris												particle of dust or debris						mallaq	mallaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
malleg-	vfk]su-	close (be or get ~)		mallegtuq \'91it got next to something 
\f2\i (expressed in the terminalis case)
\f0\i0 \'92; maallgaa \'91it got next to it\'92 / mallegtaa \'91he brought it next to something\'92; maallgutuq \'91he brought something close\'92; maallgutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  got next to each other\'92; sikuk malleghquk \'91the ice closed in\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mateg-	next to (be or get ~)												to be or get close; to be or get next to		PY-S ma@0!-				malleg-	malleg-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 -\
malliigh-	vfk]74-	sweep		malliightuq \'91he swept up\'92; malliighaa \'91he swept it\'92 /													to sweep		< mallaq-(ng)igh-				malligh-	mallxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
malliighusiq	vfk]74ecb2	broom		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 malliighusik
\f2\i , for one such device	
\f0\i0 bird wing used as broom	vacuum cleaner											broom; bird wing used as broom; vacuum cleaner		< malliigh-(u)siq				mallighusiq	mallxghusiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
mallu	vfk]/	carcass that has drifted ashore		mallunguq \'91he found a beached carcass\'92; Estugaghllunga ilakumtaaqa 
\f2\i mallukaqa
\f0\i0 , kaanneghhaaftuq unaaq. \'91When I went to the story I 
\f2\i ran into
\f0\i0  my friend who evidently had arrived this morning.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 93)	beached carcass	unexpectedly encountered person											carcass that has drifted ashore; beached carcass; unexpectedly encountered person		PY-S ma@u(k)				mallu	mallu	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
Mallu	Vfk]/	Matlyu in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Tkachen Bay in Chukotka (site near the head of ~)												Matlyu in Chukotka; site near the head of Tkachen Bay in Chukotka				CK		Mallu	Mallu	\uc0\u1052 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
mamaasiq	vfv6cb2	bottle for nursing		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 mamaasik,
\f2\i  for one bottle	
\f0\i0 baby-bottle												bottle for nursing; baby-bottle		< mamagh-(u)siq				mamasiq	mamxsiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
mamagh-	vfvf4-	suck (at breast or bottle)		mamaghtuq \'91he sucked\'92; mamaghaa \'91he sucked it\'92 / mamaghtaa \'91she let him suck, suckled him, breastfed him, nursed him\'92; mamaghtiiq \'91she is nursing a baby\'92													to suck (at breast or bottle)		PE mama3(-)				mamagh-	mamagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mamaghiitaq	vfvf47nf2	brassiere		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 mamaghiitak,
\f2\i  for one brassiere													
\f0\i0 brassiere		< mamaq-(ng)iitaq				mamaghitaq	mamaghxtaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Mamaghnak	Vfvf4yfr	Mamagnak Mts. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Mamagnak Mts. on St. Lawrence Is.						Mamaghnak	Mamaghnak	\uc0\u1052 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
mamaghnaq	vfvf4yf2	opening, small, where oil or gas flows out to burner of gas stove, lantern, ect.		suksugtam mamaghnaa nuqutughqwaaluni kumangallgiisimaak \'91the gas stove\'92s burner nozzle hole became too big, so it hasn\'92t been burning quite as well as it had been\'92; mamaghnaa mellukegsan riighighluku kumaghtuk \'91we cleaned the fuel opening, and the device lit up\'92	nozzle of burner												burner nozzle; small opening where oil or gas flows out to burner of gas stove, lantern, ect.		< mamaq-?		CK A & W 48; Rub 316		mamaghnaq	mamaghnaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
mamaghtaq	vfvf5nf2	youngest child			child, youngest												youngest child		< mamagh-te\super 1\nosupersub -aq		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 149		mamaghtaq	mamaghtaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
mamaghti	vfvf5nb	woman or female animal with a suckling child															woman or female animal with a suckling child		< mamagh-te\super 1\nosupersub -i\super 1\nosupersub -				mamaghti	mamaghti	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1080 \
mamaghwaaq	vfvf4162	edible seashore life type, orange in color with yellow dots		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined									
\f0\i0 better identification needed				type of edible seashore life orange in color with yellow dots		< mamaq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				mamaghwaq	mamaghwxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
mamaq	vfvf2	breast		
\f2\i both milk from the breast and bottle milk	
\f0\i0 milk	spike on ice-creeper											milk; breast; spike on ice-creeper		PE mama3(-)				mamaq	mamaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \
mamasugni	vfvfc/uyb	aged and whitened skin of beached walrus carcass															aged and whitened skin of beached walrus carcass				VK		mamasugni	mamasugni	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \
mamasugnite-	vfvfc/uybns-	age and whiten (of the skin of a beached walrus carcass)		nanevgat mamasugnilngughmeng neghyuwaaghaqelghiit mallumeng \'91the old men usually want to eat the aged white part of the skin of a beached walrus carcass\'92; mallu taawa mamasugnilnguq \'91there (is) a beached walrus with aged white skin\'92													to age and whiten (of the skin of a beached walrus carcass)		< mamaq-sugnite-		CK A & W 48		mamasugnite-	mamasugnite-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Mamlagnaq	Vfvkzuyf2	site on St. Lawrence Is. St. Lawrence Is. on opposite side of mountain from Apetiki Camp (Tapghuq)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on St. Lawrence Is. on opposite side of mountain from Apetiki Camp (Tapghuq)						Mamlagnaq	Mamlagnaq	\uc0\u1052 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
mamleg-
\f3\b \super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vfvksu-\'a1	dark (be ~)		mamlegtuq (mamlegluni) \'91it is or was dark\'92 /													to be dark		PY-S ta(a)ml0k				mamleg-1	mamleg-1	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\super 1\
\nosupersub mamleg-2	vfvksu-\'99	closer to something (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  mamlegngalghii minglemun qavaghvik \'91a bed that\'92s closer to the wall\'92													to be closer to something				CK Rub 316		mamleg-2	mamleg-2	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\super 2\
\nosupersub mamlegraagte-	vfvksuh6[ns-	start to get dark			dark (start to get ~)												to start to get dark		< mamleg\super 1\nosupersub -?-				mamlegragte-	mamlegrxgte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mamlegte-	vfvks[ns-	dark (become ~)		mamlegtuq (mamleglluni) \'91it became dark\'92 /													to become dark		< mamleg\super 1\nosupersub -?-				mamlegte-	mamlegte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mamlegute-	vfvksuens-	block light		mamlegutaa \'91he is blocking her light\'92 /	cast a shadow on	dark (appear as a ~ spot or form in front of (it))											to block light; to cast a shadow on; to appear as a dark spot or form in front of it (it)		< mamleg-(u)te-				mamlegute-	mamlegute-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mamlek	vfvksr	darkness															darkness		PY-S ta(a)ml0k				mamlek	mamlek	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
manaan	vfy6y	hook, line and sinker		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 manaatet, 
\f2\i for one such fishing set													
\f0\i0 hook, line and sinker		< managh-(u)n				manan	manxn	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u257 \u1085 \
managh-	vfyf4-	fish with hook and line		managhtuq \'91he fished by jigging with hook and line\'92; managhaa \'91he caught it by jigging\'92 /	catch (fish) with hook and line	jig for fish											to fish with hook and line; to jig for fish; to catch (fish) with hook and line		PE mana3-				managh-	managh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
manaq	vfyf2	lure for jigging for fish			bait												lure for jigging for fish; bait		PE mana3				manaq	manaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
mangagigh-	vf3fub4-	remove outer layer of skin															to remove outer layer of skin		< mangak-igh-				mangagigh-	mangagigh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
mangagte-	vf3f[ns-	loose (part of) outer layer of skin through rubbing or the like															to loose (part of) outer layer of skin through rubbing or the like		mangak-?-				mangagte-	mangagte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mangak	vf3fr	outer layer of skin or hide		= mangek													outer layer of skin or hide		PE ma&a!-				mangak	mangak	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \
mangalquq	vf3fk]2e2	callus															callus		< mangak-quq				mangalquq	mangalquq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
mangek	vf3sr	outer layer of skin or hide		amighqaq kiightekani maang\'92gakun aagteghllagumaa \'91she made the outer part of the skin she is splitting too thick\'92; amiiram maanggi kiyang qaasliiluki sangllaghaqiit \'91the outer part of the seal skin is usually on the outside when making something\'92; = mangak													outer layer of skin or hide				CK A & W 46		mangek	mangek	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1082 \
mangghute-	vf34ens-	tie rope securely		
\f2\i Chukotkan; questioned													
\f0\i0 to tie rope securely						mangghute-	mangghute-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mangigh-	vf3b4-	stop crying		mangightuq \'91he stopped crying\'92 / mangightaa \'91he helped her to stop crying\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  imaangigh-, mangsingugh-, mangyaangigh-	cry (stop ~ing)												to stop crying		PE man0!- and ma&0-				mangigh-	mangigh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
mangilate-	vf3bkzn-	spread in various directions		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 to spread in various directions	hfcghjcnhfyznm\\ hfpyjcbn d hfpyst cnjhjys			CK V & E 178 		mangilate-	mangilate-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1090 -\
mangkeraasiq	vf3rsh6cb2	wrench		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 mangkeraasik
\f2\i , for one wrench; also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 wrench		from English \'91monkey wrench\'92	SLI Chuk.	CK Rub 319		mangkerasiq	mangkerxsiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
mangki	vf3rb	monkey		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka; 
\f0\i0 Qawaagpagem tengunnaqumakanga unglutminun 
\f2\i mankingiighhaq
\f0\i0 . \'91The giant bird was going to fly off to its nest with the little 
\f2\i monkey
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AANGHHAQ 82)													monkey		from English \'91monkey\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R319, V&E52)		
\f0\i0 mangki	mangki	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1082 \u1080 \
mangneghrak	vf3ys4hfr	rope for whaling made from hide of young female walrus		mangneghragmeng tapghaghrangllaamalghii aghveghniighmi atughqameng \'91he make a new rope from young female walrus hide to use in whaling\'92	yearling walrus	walrus yearling											rope for whaling made from hide of young female walrus; yearling walrus				gloss 1CK A & W 48; gloss 2 CK Rub 319		mangneghrak	mangneghrak	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
mangsingugh-	vf3cb3e4-	soothe		mangsingughaa \'91he soothed her\'92 / mangsingughiiq \'91he soothed someone\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 manigugh-	calm												to soothe; to calm				VK		mangsingugh-	mangsingugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
mangtaaq	vf3n62	bird\'92s nest		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mangteghaq; 
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  mangtaaghet,
\f2\i  for one nest (with eggs); Mangtaaghhaat
\f0\i0  nalluniighiit takwaaghaataghnaluki, aflengaknalukillu. \'91They put a marker at the little 
\f2\i nest
\f0\i0  so that they could come see it and watch over it.\'92 (PIYAA. 7)	nest of bird												bird's nest						mangtaq	mangtxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
mangtagregaq	vf3nfuhsuf2	skin, thin, from whale mouth area															thin skin from whale mouth area		< mangtak-regaq				mangtagregaq	mangtagregaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
mangtak	vf3nfr	edible black whale skin		Aghveghem 
\f2\i mangtaga
\f0\i0  qamaglluku pilagaat. \'91They cut all the 
\f2\i skin
\f0\i0  off the whale.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 95)	whale skin, edible	muktuk											edible black whale skin; muktuk		PE ma&ta!				mangtak	mangtak	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \
mangteghagh-	vf3ns4f4-	make a house for		
\f2\i direct verbalization of 
\f0\i0 mangteghaq \'91house\'92	reassemble a house (in fall after its parts have been aired out)												to make a house for; to reassemble a house (in fall after its parts have been aired out)				second gloss from VK\'92s notes		mangteghagh-	mangteghagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mangteghapik	vf3ns4fgbr	house (traditional dome-shaped Chukchi-style ~ with walrus skin roofing held in place by rocks hanging from the edge)		
\f2\i this term is used to distinguish the traditional Chukchi-style Eskimo house from a modern house; this style of house replaced the earlier semi-subterranean house (nenglu) and was itself replaced by  the Euro-American style frame house	
\f0\i0 yaranga												traditional dome-shaped Chukchi-style house with walrus skin roofing held in place by rocks hanging from the edge; yaranga		< mangteghaq-pik				mangteghapik	mangteghapik	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
mangteghaq	vf3ns4f2	house		
\f2\i this term is used to refer to the traditional Chukchi-style Eskimo dome-shaped house with walrus skin cover held down with rock weights hanging from the edges , called \'91yaranga\'92 in Russian, or to a modern house, as opposed to the earlier semi-subterranean house, 
\f0\i0 nenglu; 
\f2\i the term 
\f0\i0 mangteghapik
\f2\i  is used to distinguish the traditional Chukchi style house from a modern house;
\f0\i0  = mengteghaq													house		PE mamt03a3			> mangteghapik, mangeghasqwaaq, mangteghilleq	mangteghaq	mangteghaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
mangteghasqwaaq	vf3ns4fc2162	summer house (often makeshift, of walrus hide)			house (summer ~ (often makeshift, of walrus hide))												summer house (often makeshift, of walrus hide)		< mangteghaq-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				mangteghasqwaq	mangteghasqwxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
mangteghiigh-	vf3ns474-	build a house		mangteghiightuq \'91he built a house\'92; manteghiighaa \'91he built a house for him\'92 /													to build a house		< mangteghaq-ligh-				mangteghigh-	mangteghxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1271 -\
mangteghilleq	vf3ns4bk]s2	site of former house or settlement			house ruins												site of former house or settlement; house ruins		< mangeghaq-?-lleq				mangteghilleq	mangteghilleq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
mangtiisiq	vf3n7cb2	incantation (a particular ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 a particular incantation				CK Rub 320		mangtisiq	mangtxsiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
mangughte-	vf3e5ns-	surface or show the back when beginning to dive deeply (of whale)		piigluku aghveq mangughsan aghveqaa \'91they followed the whale and when it was starting down for a deep dive, he struck it\'92													to surface or show the back when beginning to dive deeply (of whale)				CK A & W 49 CK		mangughte-	mangughte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mangugte-	vf3e[ns-	lose some of the skin from the back (of a whale)															to lose some of the skin from the back (of a whale)				VK		mangugte-	mangugte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mangugtekaq	vf3e[nsrf2	whale which has lost some of the skin from its back		aghveq mallungat mangugtekaaftuq iwernga asinga mangtalek \'91the beached whale carcass that they found didn\'92t have any skin on the back but the bottom had some\'92; qawiighneq talwa mangugtellghilnguq akuraamakangat \'91they found a whale (carcass) in the ocean that still has its skin\'92													whale which has lost some of the skin from its back		< mangugte-kaq		CK A & W 49		mangugtekaq	mangugtekaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
manguna	vf3eyf	walrus skin, thick, with hair															thick walrus skin with hair		PE ma&una(!)				manguna	manguna	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \
manguultaq	vf38k]nf2	dirt caked up on some part of one\'92s body															dirt caked up on some part of one\'92s body						mangultaq	mangxltaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
mangyaangigh-	vf3m93b4-	sob uncontrollably after crying		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mangigh-													to sob uncontrollably after crying		PE man0!yu!a3- (under PE man0!-)				mangyangigh-	mangyxngigh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
mangzighhe-	vf3pb5s-	gnaw		mangzighhuq \'91it gnawed\'92; mangzighhaa \'91it gnawed on it\'92 / mangzighhelleq \'91gnawed spot\'92													to gnaw						mangzighhe-	mangzighhe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1079 \u1080 \u1203 \u1099 -\
mani	vfyb	money		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka; 
\f0\i0 Enkaam piniqnaanghitaghsi Kiyaghneq piniqumaluku 
\f2\i mani
\f0\i0 . \'91Also, you won\'92t love God by loving 
\f2\i money
\f0\i0 .\'92 (Matthew 6.24); Una qepghaqaq allgeqaaguq 
\f2\i maningyama
\f0\i0  grant-meng \'85. \'91This project began when I received 
\f2\i funds
\f0\i0  from a grant \'85.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. xv)													money		from English \'91money\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R317)	
\f0\i0 ; > manilghutaq	mani	mani	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
mani-	vfyb-	move in close		maniiq \'91he moved close to something\'92; manii \'91he moved close to it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0  maniguute-, maniighaghte-	close (move in ~)												to move in close		PE mani-				mani-	mani-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 -\
manigniigh-	vfybub74-	gather eggs		Tapghighlunga 
\f2\i manigniightunga
\f0\i0  pennani. \'91I used a rope to hang onto while 
\f2\i gathering eggs 
\f0\i0 on the cliffs.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 129)	look for eggs												to gather eggs; to look for eggs		< manik-niigh-				manignigh-	manignxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1251 \u1271 -\
manigugh-	vfybue4-	soothe		manigughaa \'91he soothed her\'92 / manigughiiq \'91he soothed someone\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 mangsingugh-	calm												to soothe; to calm						manigugh-	manigugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\

\f1\b maniguute-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vfybu8ns-\'a1	worship		maniguutuq \'91he is being pitiful\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is humbly requesting something\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mani-	beg	pitiful way (present oneself in a ~)								humbly request something			to worship; to beg; to present oneself in a pitiful way; to humbly request something					 > maniguutusiq 	manigute-1	manigxte-1	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub maniguute-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vfybu8ns\'99	have eggs (of bird)			eggs (have ~ (of bird))												to have eggs (of bird)		< manik-?-				manigute-2	manigxte-2	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub maniguutusiq	vfybu8necb2	bribe															bribe		< maniguute\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				manigutusiq	manigxtusiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
manik	vfybr	bird\'92s egg		manigniightuq \'91he looked for eggs\'92; manigtuq \'91he collected eggs\'92; maniliightuq \'91he cooked eggs\'92; manigtughtuq \'91he ate eggs\'92	egg (of bird)												bird's egg		PE manni!				manik	manik	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1082 \
manilghu	vfybk4e	walrus group coming to shore															group of walrus coming to shore				CK J.Koonooka; Rub 318		manilghu	manilghu	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \
manilghutaq	vfybk4enf2	coin purse		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  manilghutak, 
\f2\i for one wallet	
\f0\i0 wallet	bank											coin purse; wallet; bank		< mani-lghutaq				manilghutaq	manilghutaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
manimsag-	vfybvcfu-	come (keep on coming over to something)		qikmit manimsagnaqeghllaguut igatam \'91the dogs keep on coming over because of hunger\'92; neqet saapngalghiit manimsagumiit \'91they kept on coming to the food that was covered\'92; taghnughhaat iinghutkamun manimsagaataghllaguut \'91the children kept on going to the place they were told not to go to\'92	go (keep on going over to something)												to keep on coming or going over to something		< mani-?		CK A & W 49; VK		manimsag-	manimsag-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1084 \u1089 \u1072 \u1075 -\
manin	vfyby	fortification against enemy warriors		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  manitet,
\f2\i  for one fortification;
\f0\i0  akingani agani manitet taaganniiqsaghiit \'91they say that there used to be fortifications south of the village\'92	barricade												fortification against enemy warriors				CK A &W 49		manin	manin	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1085 \
manitaq	vfybnf2	shield, protective, fixed (as used in warfare)		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 manitat, 
\f2\i for one such shield													
\f0\i0 fixed protective shield (as used in warfare)				VK\'92s notes		manitaq	manitaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b mantela\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vfynskf\super s	\nosupersub mantle (for gas lantern or lamp)															mantle (for gas lantern or lamp)		from English \'91mantle\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 160		mantelae	mantelae	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1072 \u1099 \
manu	vfye	front		manunga \'91its front\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91his neck and chest\'92	chest and neck area right below one\'92s face												front; chest and neck area right below one\'92s face		PE manu			; > manughaq, manulek, manuli-, manughiitaq	manu	manu	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \
manughaq	vfye4f2	front of house															immediate front of house		< manu-ghaq; PE manu3a3 (under PE manu)				manughaq	manughaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
manulek	vfyeksr	fin whale			whale (fin ~)	
\f2\i Balaenoptera physalus											
\f0\i0 fin whale 
\f2\i (Balaenoptera physalus)		
\f0\i0 < manu-lek				manulek	manulek	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
manuli-	vfyekb-	frosted (be ~ (of lower part of parka ruff), or have a ~ ruff		manuliiq \'91he has frost on the lower part of his ruff (near his mouth and nose)\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91it (ruff) is frosted\'92 /													to be frosted (of lower part of parka ruff); to have a frosted ruff		< manu-li-				manuli-	manuli-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 -\
manungiitaq	vfye37nf2	bib (as for a baby)															bib (as for a baby)		< manu-(ng)iitaq				manungitaq	manungxtaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
maqaaghte-	vf265ns-	warm up		maqaaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  maqaaghtaa \'91he or it warmed up\'92 / siqineq maqaaghtaqaa \'91the sun is getting warm (as in spring)\'92													to warm up		< maqagh-?-				maqaghte-	maqxghte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maqaasghaq	vf26c5f2	insulation to keep heat in		Amim qaayngakun qakmagun eslataakun 
\f2\i maqaasghightuutkaqegkangit
\f0\i0 . \'91They\'92d put it as 
\f2\i insulation
\f0\i0  over the surface of the skin (of the house) out there.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:104)													insulation to keep heat in		< maqagh-?-				maqasghaq	maqxsghaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u257 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
maqagh-	vf2f4-	warm (be ~ (of clothing, house, etc.))		maqaghtuq \'91it (clothing, house) is warm\'92 / maqalghii \'91warm clothing, house\'92; maqatun atkugtunga \'91I put on a warm parka\'92													to be warm (of clothing, house, etc.)		PY-S maqaq			maqaghqe-, maqaaghte-, maqaasqaq	maqagh-	maqagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
maqaghqe-	vf2f52s-	dress warmly		maqaghquq he dressed warmly; maqaghqaa he dressed her warmly /													to dress warmly		< maqagh-ghqe\super 3\nosupersub -				maqaghqe-	maqaghqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
maqaghqun	vf2f52ey	insulation to keep heat in															insulation to keep heat in		< maqaghqe-(u)n		CK Rub 313		maqaghqun	maqaghqun	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
maqalla	vf2fk]z	algae, green		iipagmi qalmesam maqallangi qiighninnaghllaget igleghlleghhiini \'91in extreme low tide the algae on the rocks is really slippery when one walks on it\'92; kiiwem esnekek maqallaghllaguftuq \'91the beach of the river turned out to have a lot of algae\'92	green algae												green algae				CK A & W 49		maqalla	maqalla	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
maqaq	vf2f2	warmth (of clothes, dwelling, etc.)		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 maqak
\f2\i , for one jacket	
\f0\i0 warm clothes	clothes, warm								light and loose fitting snow-jacket made from thin skin of young reindeer			warmth (of clothes, dwelling, etc.); warm clothes; light and loose fitting snow-jacket made from thin skin of young reindeer		PY-S maqaq				maqaq	maqaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
maqe-	vf2s-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > maaqe-, maqete-, maqughaghti-															PE maq0-				maqe-	maqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
maqete-	vf2sns-	drain		maqetaa \'91he drained it\'92 /	remove liquid from (it)												to drain; to remove liquid from (it)		PE maq0t- (under PE maq0-); < maqe-te\super 1\nosupersub -			; > maaqfik, maaqneghek, maaqute-	maqete-	maqete-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
maqetisiq	vf2\uc0\u8706 nbcb2	milk-pail			flow (device used in making a liquid ~)								given with long shwa, but unlikely; check (I took one out, CK)				device used in making a liquid flow; milk-pail	gjljqybr	< maqete-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq		Rub. 314		maqetisiq	maqetisiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u772 \u1090 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
maqiighsagh-	vf275cf4-	inadequately dressed for the cold (be ~)		
\f2\i Maqiighsapaglunga
\f0\i0  ghhuutaanga. \'91I got cold from 
\f2\i not wearing enough clothes
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 88)													to be inadequately dressed for the cold		< maqaq-(ng)igh-sagh-				maqighsagh-	maqxghsagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1203 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Maqneghlugak	Vf2y]s4k/ufr	Troutman Lake (site at northeast corner site of ~ near Gambell)		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site at northeast corner of Troutman Lake near Gambell						Maqneghlugak	Maqneghlugak	\uc0\u1052 \u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \
Maqneq	Vf2y]s2	Maknik Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  Maqneghem Naayvaa; 
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Maknik Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.						Maqneq	Maqneq	\uc0\u1052 \u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
maqughaghti-	vf2e4f5nb-	tears (shed ~)		maqughaghtiiq \'91he shed tears\'92 /	shed tears												to shed tears		< maqe-?-				maqughaghti-	maqughaghti-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1080 -\
Maramaku	Vfhfvfre	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 146		Maramaku	Maramaku	\uc0\u1052 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \
masa-	vfcz-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > masaaghi-, masaqiighwagh-															PE maca3				masa-	masa-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 -\
masaaghi-	vfc94b-	weather warms up in spring		masaaghiiq 
\f2\i or 
\f0\i0 masaaghii \'91it warmed up\'92 /													for weather to warm up in spring		< masa-?-				masaghi-	masxghi-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1080 -\
masaqiighwagh-	vfcf2741f4-	sun oneself		masaqiighwaatkelluku esnami qavaamalghiinga \'91while I was sunning myself at the beach, I fell asleep\'92; navek masaqiighwaghyaqaalta \'91let\'92s go out somewhere to lie in the sun\'92													sun oneself				CK A & W 50 CK 		masaqighwagh-	masaqxghwagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
maseghiighusiq	vfcs474ecb2	scraper for removing ice from fishing line		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 is there a word maseghiq meaning \'91ice on fishing line\'92 ?				scraper for removing ice from fishing line		< ?-(ng)igh-(u)siq		CK Rub 321		maseghighusiq	maseghxghusiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
masighagh-	vfcb4f4-	warm oneself by stove or other heat source		masighaghtuq \'91he warmed up\'92; masighaghaa \'91he warmed it up\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 masa-													to warm oneself by stove or other heat source						masighagh-	masighagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Masingka	Vfcb3rf	Eskimo, St. Lawrence Island / Siberian Yupik or Naukan Yupik		
\f2\i this originally Chukchi term is used for
\f0\i0  \'91Yupik Eskimo\'92 
\f2\i by  some Chukotkan Yupik and some St. Lawrence Islanders who stem from Chukotka; also functions as a an adverbial or interjectional particle; 
\f0\i0 Sivuughaqestaghngaamkun quyngiqa naavyighnayukan pingayiitaqa. "
\f2\i Masingka
\f0\i0  legan itagnalghii!" \'91Even though I hesitated thinking that my reindeer might be overwhelmed I did put the third one on it. \'93
\f2\i Sure thing;
\f0\i0  let\'92s do it; it will be fine\'94, (I said). (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:78); Kiyaghsimaaq Qigimi yuuk neqengyuqaq. Kiigunneghagu qayaghtuneghmini unakaqegkanga 
\f2\i masingka
\f0\i0  uksumi naamatkaghqaq neqa. \'91There lived man, a good provider, in Qigi. Every summer he went out hunting and 
\f2\i sure enough
\f0\i0  he\'92d get food sufficient for the winter.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 141); Uyughani pilaataghaa, "Naqamllu whaa elpek pengegniighutaaten. 
\f2\i Masingka
\f0\i0  nemetwhayaaghtaaten." \'91She said to her younger brother, \'93You are no longer someone who one must worry about. You\'92ve gotten so that you can stay on your own 
\f2\i just fine
\f0\i0  now.\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGH. 162)	originally	very								sure thing			St. Lawrence Island / Siberian Yupik Eskimo or Naukan Yupik Eskimo; 
\f2\i as a particle: 
\f0\i0 originally; genuinely; very; fully; sure thing; it\'92s alright; just fine		from Chukchi mec0nk0 \'91well, very well; quite, fully, enough\'92	09, 14, 19			Masingka	Masingka	\uc0\u1052 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1082 \u1072 \
masinkate-	vfcbyrfns-	succeed at what one is doing		Yuget aghvengneghmeggni 
\f2\i masinkataqut
\f0\i0  nunaaghet. \'91Whenever the people catch a whale, the village 
\f2\i does well
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AANHHAQ 30)	well (do ~)	prosper											to succeed at what one is doing; to do well; to prosper		< masinka-?-				masinkate-	masinkate-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
masisu	vfcbc/	even		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0   Meghmun ateghyalghiimi teghhanun pesughyukangghituq. 
\f2\i Masisu
\f0\i0  esghaamakanga aga yuggaq tallileklu ighuleklu takestaaghhaghmeng naqam yugusii aangepiglleghhii. \'91He got to the bottom of the sea and had no difficulty breathing. 
\f2\i Moreover
\f0\i0  [there] he saw a little person with long arms and legs and a big torso.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 93); = maasisu	however	already								moreover			even; however; already; moreover		from Chukchi mecic\'92u \'91besides\'92				masisu	masisu	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1089 \u1102 \
masleg-	vfcksu-	skinny (become ~)		neghqutkiillghem qikmiput taawa maslegtuutut \'91our dogs are getting skinny because we don\'92t have food for them\'92; iilqeghllagem qenwat maslegtuq \'91he\'92s getting thin, because he\'92s been so depressed\'92; Uukat kinenghhat, iwhani piniipigtut September-em uukaghtii. Kineghllagtestegpenaki qeghaataqelghiit eghqwaaghutkaghqaaluki. Aamta sivuliit August-em pingi 
\f2\i maslekanighaqut
\f0\i0 . \'91September is best for drying cod. Before they get too dry they\'92d be bundled and stored. The first ones, those of August, would 
\f2\i shrivel up
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:92)	thin (get ~)	emaciated (become ~)								shrivel up			to become skinny; to get thin; become emaciated				CK A & W 50		masleg-	masleg-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
masugh-	vfc/4-	edge (get or go right to or on the ~)		masughluku neghqwaagha ggaaygem uuupunnakek \'91let him cut it right on the edge of the shoulder blade\'92													to get or go right to or on the edge				CK A & W 50		masugh-	masugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\
masuk	vfc/r	core of tusk, bone or root															core of tusk, bone or root		cf. PI macuk				masuk	masuk	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
mataawi-	vfn61b-	hard time (have a ~)		mataawiiq \'91he had a hard time\'92 / mataawitkaa \'91he had a hard time over it\'92; mekelghiighhaam unangkani mataawisimaagu tuguneghmeng; kitum angyanun tugusqelligu \'91the boy was having a hard time retrieving the seal he\'92d caught; he should have had someone in a neighboring boat retrieve it\'92													to have a hard time		from Chukchi metew0k \'91despair; be unable\'92	14			matawi-	matxwi-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\
matagh-	vfnf4-	undressed		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  mataghtuq \'91he took off his parka or coat, or his clothes\'92; mataghngaaq \'91he is without a parka or coat, undressed\'92; mataghmi aanuq \'91he went outside without a coat\'92	parka-less	coatless											undressed; parka-less; coatless		PE matta3-			; > mataghqe-	matagh-	matagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mataghhwaagh-	vfnf5164-	dress lightly		aqlagha mataghhwaaghvigituq \'91there\'92s no way to get by dressing lightly  in the cold\'92; kiigmi mataghhwaaq itagnaghtuq \'91dressing lightly in the summer is fine\'92													to dress lightly		< matagh-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 2\nosupersub -		CK A & W 50		mataghhwagh-	mataghhwxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
mataghqe-	vfnf52s-	strip one\'92s clothes off		mataghquq \'91he removed his (own) outer clothing\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he stripped\'92; mataghqaa \'91he removed his (another\'92s) outer clothing\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he stripped him\'92 / 	remove outer garment												to strip one\'92s clothes off; to remove outer garment		< matagh-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				mataghqe-	mataghqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
mateg-	vfnsu-	stuck (get ~ onto something)		mategtuq \'91it got stuck on something\'92 / mategtaa \'91he stuck it on\'92; mategngaaq \'91it has been stuck on\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 malleg-	come side by side with something												to get stuck onto something; to come side by side with something						mateg-	mateg-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 -\
mayaari-	vf9hb-	exhausted (feel ~)		mayaariiq \'91he felt weak and exhausted\'92 /	weak (feel ~)												to feel weak and exhausted				VK\'92s notes, and R 324		mayari-	mayxri-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1088 \u1080 -\

\f1\b maya\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vfz\super s	\nosupersub pile of things		maaynga \'91his pile, his winnings\'92	winnings in a game	heap											pile of things; winnings in a game; heap						mayae	mayae	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1103 \u1099 \
mayagh-	vfz4-	thin (being or becoming ~)		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  mayaghtuq \'91he became thin\'92 / \'91mayaghmelnguq one who is thin\'92; mayaghtekaq \'91one who became thin\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  wayagh-													being or becoming thin		cf. PE ivaya3- (under PE iva3-)				mayagh-	mayagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1103 \u1271 -\
mayaneq	vfzys2	poor condition (one that is in ~ from lack of (proper) food)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 one that is in poor condition from lack of (proper) food)		< mayagh-neq\super 1\nosupersub  (?)		CK Rub 324		mayaneq	mayaneq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1103 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
mayari-	vfzhb-	tire		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E)	
\f0\i0 taste (lose fragrance, ~ or zest)												to tire; to lose fragrance, taste or zest	ecnfnm. dsls[fncz			CK V & E 152; Rub 324		mayari-	mayari-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1103 \u1088 \u1080 -\
Mayeghhaq	Vfqs5f2	site in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka				Men. 1972, 1975		mayeghhaq	mayeghhaq	\uc0\u1052 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
mayeqaan	vfqs26n	boot, short, with fold over insole		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 short boot with fold over insole				CK Rub 310		mayeqan	mayeqxn	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1179 \u257 \u1090 \
mayeqelleghagh-	vfqs2sk]s4f4-	climb		\'85 yuuk qineghquulluni elngaatall asitmun. Whangallu 
\f2\i mayeqellegaghlunga 
\f0\i0 qineghtunga. '\'85 many a person was looking down from there. I too
\f2\i  climbed up 
\f0\i0 and looked down.' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:190)													to climb		< mayugh-?-		CK Rub 310 CK		mayeqelleghagh-	mayeqelleghagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mayeraaghpak	vfqsh65gfr	giant		
\f2\i Mayeraaghpagem
\f0\i0  tuguluku naasquminun qaakumakanga. \'91The 
\f2\i giant
\f0\i0  grabbed him and put him up on his head.\'92 (YUGG. Mayer. 13)													giant		< maya\super e\nosupersub -raaq-ghpak				mayeraghpak	mayerxghpak	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
mayii	vfq7	up (the way ~)		ikani mayiimi pegnem qaygeghtunga \'91I barely got to the top at the slope south of here\'92; Qayillghet mayiingat iggagrukegtepigtuq \'91the slope at Qayilleq is steep\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mayugh-	slope												slope; the way up				CK A & W 50		mayi	mayx	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1253 \u1251 \
mayleghuke-	vfqks4ers-	doubts (have ~ about (it))		mayleghuklukek ullghitagni guutelleghqakek unisimakek \'91he didn\'92t think his snowmachine would start, so he left it\'92													to have doubts about (it)				CK A & W 50		mayleghuke-	mayleghuke-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1253 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 -\
mayleghunagh-	vfqks4eyf4-	doubtful (be ~)		apeghtuqii mayleghunaghtut liitelleghqii qayughllak pineghlliqutet nagategpenateng \'91her students  skills at learning don\'92t seem very promising because they don\'92t listen\'92; mayleghuklukek ullghitagni guutelleghqakek unisimakek \'91his snowmachine\'92s capability of starting seemed doubtful, so he left it\'92	unpromising (appear ~)												to be doubtful; to appear unpromising				CK A & W 50		mayleghunagh-	mayleghunagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1253 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Mayngeguk	Vfq3suer	former village on south shore of Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village on south shore of Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka 						Mayngeguk	Mayngeguk	\uc0\u1052 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1082 \
mayngeq	vfq3s2	skinny one		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 skinny one				CK Rub 310		mayngeq	mayngeq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1099 \u1179 \
mayugh-	vf/4-	go up		mayughtuq \'91he went up\'92; mayughaa \'91he went up it\'92 / mayuutaa \'91he took it up\'92	ascend	climb											to go up; to ascend; to climb		PE mayu3-			
\f2\i ; > mayughaatak, mayughneq, mayughvik, Mayughwaaq	
\f0\i0 mayugh-	mayugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 -\
mayughaataq	vf/46nf2	ladder		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  mayughaatak,
\f2\i  for one ladder or staircase	
\f0\i0 staircase	steps											ladder; staircase; steps		< mayugh-? -(u)taq				mayughataq	mayughxtaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Mayughii	Vf/47	Cape Myaughee on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Myaughee (Cape ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)												Cape Myaughee on St. Lawrence Is.		< mayugh-?				Mayughi	Mayughx	\uc0\u1052 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 \u1251 \
mayughneq	vf/4ys2	pile			heap	sternpost of boat								bowpost of boat			pile; heap; sternpost of boat; bowpost of boat		< mayugh-neq\super 2				\nosupersub mayughneq	mayughneq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
mayughtaq	vf/5nf2	driftwood that is piled on the beach (to be visible and to dry) to be taken later		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  mayughtat,
\f2\i  for one pile; 
\f0\i0 aqfayaqenka mayughtat aviitut \'91when I went to get the (site of the) piled up pieces of driftwood, they were missing\'92	heap	pile											driftwood that is piled on the beach (to be visible and to dry) to be taken later; heap; pile		< mayugh-te\super 1\nosupersub -aq		CK A & W 51; Rub 324		mayughtaq	mayughtaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
mayughti-	vf/5nb-	pile up wood or other things		mayughtiiq \'91he made a pile\'92 / quugmeng mayughtimaanga qawani anigukan aqfayaghqameng \'91I piled some driftwood east of here so that I can get it when snow falls\'92	make a pile												to pile up wood or other things; to make a pile		< mayugh-te\super 2\nosupersub -i\super 1\nosupersub -				mayughti-	mayughti-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1080 -\
mayughvik	vf/4dbr	route leaing up															route leading up		< mayugh-vik				mayughvik	mayughvik	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
Mayughwaaq	vf/4162	Gambell (site of old village at the foot of the mountain behind ~)		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 old village site at the foot of the mountain behind Gambell		< mayugh-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				Mayughwaq	Mayughwxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
mayugnite-	vf/uybns-	snagged (become ~ (of a hook getting stuck on something underwater))		mayugnitkat iqaniighusinka iikneghmeng aghtughanka \'91I can\'92t get loose my crabbing-hooks that are snagged (hooked in the rocks)\'92; taana anglaaq mayugninnapigtuq \'91it\'92s easy to get hooks snagged in that hole  made in the ice\'92													to become snagged (of a hook getting stuck on something underwater)				CK A & W 51		mayugnite-	mayugnite-	\uc0\u1084 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
megh<e>-	vs4\'f8s\uc0\u960 -	drink (any beverage, especially one that is cool)		meghtuq \'91he drank\'92; meghaa \'91he drank it\'92 / 
\f2\i in some respects this verb base acts as if it were
\f0\i0  megh- 
\f2\i while in other respects it acts as if it were 
\f0\i0 meghe-; 
\f2\i the following example shows that in some cases both patterns are possible: 
\f0\i0 meghenghituq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  menghituq \'91he didn't drink\'92; megheghllaguuq \'91he is very drunk\'92; meghyaghqaq \'91something to drink\'92; meqayuk \'91one who drinks alcoholic beverages\'92; meghelghii \'91one who is drinking\'92; 
\f2\i compare
\f0\i0  negh<e>-; 
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92, 
\f2\i the nominal counterpart of this noun base	
\f0\i0 drink an alcoholic beverage												to drink (any beverage, especially one that is cool); to drink an alcoholic beverage		PE 0m03(-)			xxxe	megh<e>-	megh<e>-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 (\u1099 )-\
meghaaq	vs462	puddle		meghaaghmi \'91in the puddle\'92													puddle		< meq-?				meghaq	meghxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \
meghaataq	vs46nf2	soda pop			pop (soda ~)	soft drink								drink (soft ~)			soda pop; soft drink		< megh-?-(u)taq		VK		meghataq	meghxtaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b meghaq*\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vs4f2\super \'a1	\nosupersub seal breathing hole in ice		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 meghaak, 
\f2\i for one such hole													
\f0\i0 seal breathing hole in ice; open water between large cakes of ice		< meq-ghaq				meghaq*1	meghaq*1	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b meghaq*\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vs4f2\super \'99	\nosupersub beverage															beverage		< meq-ghaq				meghaq*2	meghaq*2	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 2\
meghek	vs4sr			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  meq													large vessel for melting snow for water; area of open water in pack ice; polynya	,jkmifz gjcelf lkz jnnfbdfybz cytuf					meghek	meghek	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1082 \
meghestivik	vs4scnbdbr	cafe where one can drink		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 cafe where one can drink	,eatn. rfat \'f8vtcnj ult j,sxyj vj;yj gjgbnm\uc0\u960 	< megh<e>-(te)ste-(g)i-vik		Rub. 333		meghestivik	meghestivik	\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
meghhaq*	vs5fr	small area of open water, small, in sea ice 		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 meghhaak
\f2\i , for one such area; see item 98 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004; 
\f2\i the meaning \'91childhood, infancy\'92 is said to be from the child\'92s being in a fluid state of development; 
\f0\i0 ighneni meghhaaneng peghqigsaqaa unangniighmeng \'91he taught his son how to hunt since his childhood\'92; ima meghhaatanganeng \'91since infancy\'92	childhood	infancy											small area of open water in sea ice where one can sit and watch for seals; childhood; infancy		< meq-ghhaq		CK Krupnik 98, Rub 340; CK A & W 51		meghhaq*	meghhaq*	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1072 \u1082 \
meghllak	vs5k]zr	open water, large area		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 meghllagek
\f2\i , for one such area	
\f0\i0 polynya												large area of open water; polynya		< meq-ghllak				meghllak	meghllak	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
meghnaali-	vs4y6kb-	rest		
\f2\i Meghnaaliiqluta
\f0\i0  naayghamun mayughtukut. \'91We 
\f2\i rested
\f0\i0  several times as we climbed the mountain.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 89)													to rest		< meghnugh-?-				meghnali-	meghnxli-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u257 \u1083 \u1080 -\
meghnak	vs4yfr	translucent amber-colored rock			rock, translucent amber-colored	agate											translucent amber-colored rock; agate		< meq-?				meghnak	meghnak	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
meghnugh-	vs4ye4-	tired (be ~)		meghnughtuq \'91he is tired\'92 /													to be tired		< PE m03nu3-				meghnugh-	meghnugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1091 \u1271 -\
meghqe-	vs52s-	water, apply water to (it)		meghqaa \'91he applied to or splashed water on it\'92 /	sprinkle water on (it)	water appears on ice								splash water on (it)			to water; to sprinkle water on (it); for water to appear on ice; to splash water on (it); to apply water to (it)		PE m03q0-; < meq-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -		gloss 3 Rub 340		meghqe-	meghqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
meghquute-	vs528ns-	fall into the water															to fall into the water		< meq-ghquute-				meghqute-	meghqxte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
meghraag-	vs4h6u-	clear (be ~)		nulughyalghiinga teghhani sama kayumeng esghaatunga qayughllak meq meghraakegtepiglleghhii \'91when I was fishing with a hook and line I saw a fish near the bottom because the water was very clear\'92	transparent (be ~)												to be transparent; to be clear		< megh-ghraag-		Akiingqwaghneghet 116		meghrag-	meghrxg-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1075 -\
meghraawayi-	vs4h61fqb-	transparent (be ~)			light (be very ~ in color)												to be very light in color; to be transparent		< meghraag-?-		VK		meghrawayi-	meghrxwayi-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1265 \u1072 \u1253 \u1080 -\
meghragti-	vs4hf[nb-	cry from emotional pain		meghragtiiq \'91he shed tears\'92; meghragtistaa \'91he made him shed tears\'92	shed tears												to cry from emotional pain; to shed tears		< meq-?-				meghragti-	meghragti-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 -\
meghsi-	vs5cb-	give a drink to a person or animal (dog usually)		meghsii \'91he gave him or it a drink\'92 /													to give a drink to a person or animal (dog usually)		< megh-?-				meghsi-	meghsi-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 -\
meghtagh-	vs5nf4-	fetch water		meghtaghtuq \'91he fetched water\'92 / meghtaataa \'91he fetched water for her\'92; meghtaghvikaa \'91he fetched water from it, it\'92s the place where he got water\'92	water (fetch ~)												to fetch water		PE m03ta3- (under PE 0m03(-)); < meq-tagh\super 1\nosupersub -				meghtagh-	meghtagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
meghtaghvik	vs5nf4dbr	well (for getting water)			place to get water												well; place to get water		< meghtagh-vik				meghtaghvik	meghtaghvik	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
meghun	vs4ey	dipper		
\f2\i also 
\f0\i0 meghuta; 
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  meghutek 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  meghutak, 
\f2\i for one such item	
\f0\i0 cup	can of food											dipper; cup; can of food		PE 0m(0)3un (under PE 0m03(-)); < megh<e>-(u)n				meghun	meghun	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
meghutluk	vs4enk/r	can, empty		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  meghutlugek
\f2\i , for one empty can	
\f0\i0 empty can												empty can		< meghun-lluk				meghutluk	meghutluk	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \
meghyagh-	vs4z4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > meghyaghaghqugh, meghyaghqugh-; = maghyagh-															PY-S ma3ya3-				meghyagh-	meghyagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1103 \u1271 -\
meghyaghaghqugh-	vs4z4f52e4-	lead astray		meghyaghaghqughaa \'91he led him astray\'92													to lead astray		< meghyagh-?-				meghyaghaghqugh-	meghyaghaghqugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
meghyaghqaq	vs4mz52f2	drink (something to ~)											we have this as an example, but it could be a separate entry				something to drink	yfgbnjr	< megh<e>-yaghqaq				meghyaghqaq	meghyaghqaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
meghyaghqugh-	vs4z52e4-	lead (opposite of follow)		meghyaghqughtuq \'91he lead\'92; meghyaghqughii \'91he lead them\'92 /													to lead		< meghyagh-qugh-				meghyaghqugh-	meghyaghqugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
meghyaghqughta	vs4z52e5nf	leader		Qikmighhiinaghhaa 
\f2\i meghyaghqughtenga
\f0\i0  Elqwaaghqum aapqaqaa kaatkaq. \'91According to Elqwaaqu, only his 
\f2\i lead
\f0\i0  dog made it back.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:64)	lead dog												leader; lead dog		< meghyaghqugh-(s)ta				meghyaghqughta	meghyaghqughta	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
megnu-	vsuye-	caring deeply		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  megnukaa \'91he cares deeply for him/it\'92; megnunaghtuq \'91it is important, it is valuable\'92; avaqutani megnukepiglluku anglistekaa \'91he raised his child caring deeply for him\'92; megnukumtaani saghyat kagpagii \'91he packed his important belongings\'92	valuing	important (holding as ~)											caring deeply; valuing; holding as important				CK A & W 51 CK 		megnu-	megnu-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1091 -\
megnunagh-	vsuyeyf4-	important (be ~)		megnunaghtuq \'91it is important\'92 / megnunaghtuq qayughllak naamneng aatquq \'91she is treasured since she has my mother\'92s name\'92; \'85 unguvalleq 
\f2\i megnunaghataghaghtuq
\f0\i0  neqmeng, yugusiqlu 
\f2\i megnunaghataghaghtuq
\f0\i0  aatkaneng. \'91\'85 life itself is more 
\f2\i important
\f0\i0  than food, and the body is more 
\f2\i important
\f0\i0  than clothing.\'92 (Matthew 6.25)	valued (be ~)	treasured (be ~)											to be important; to be valued; to be treasured		< megnu-nagh-				megnunagh-	megnunagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
meke-	vsrs-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > mekestaaq, mekelghiiq, mekelli-, mekitaghagh-, mekitkughmete-; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 migligrungiq, miksagaq															PE mik0-				meke-	meke-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 -\
mekegragh-	vsrsuhf4-	smooth out or make even with one\'92s teeth		Ang, piighhangllaa. Nuvagsukaghpenaan 
\f2\i mekegraghyukaghpenaan
\f0\i0 . 'Yes, braid [some thread], but don't even make a move toward moistening the strands with saliva or 
\f2\i smoothing them out with your teeth
\f0\i0 .' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:208)													to smooth out or make even  with one\'92s teeth						mekegragh-	mekegragh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mekegte-	vsrs[ns-	scrape off		maklagem qilungan qaayngi mekegtii neghyaghqaaluki \'91she scraped off the outer layer of a bearded seal\'92s intestines for eating\'92; kitum gginan mekegtagu? \'91who scraped (scratched) your face?\'92	peel off	strip off											to scrape off; to peel off; to strip off				CK A & W 51		mekegte-	mekegte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mekelghiiq	vsrsk472	boy		mekelghiighhaq \'91little boy\'92; mekelghiighet \'91boys\'92; 
\f2\i Mekelghiighhaamallemni
\f0\i0  esghapagllakaqegkegka Ungaziinkuk Sivuqaankuk naavghullutek ayuqelghiik. \'91When I was a little 
\f2\i boy
\f0\i0  I used to see Chaplino and Gambell people going back and forth.\'92 (PANGEGH. 17)													boy		< meke-?-				mekelghiq	mekelghxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \u1179 \
mekelli-	vsrsk]b-	smaller (become or make ~)		mekelliiq \'91it is getting smaller; mekellii he is making it smaller\'92 /	alter (by making smaller) in sewing												to become smaller; to make smaller; to alter (by making smaller) in sewing		PE mik0li- (under PE mik0-); < meke-i\super 2\nosupersub -				mekelli-	mekelli-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
mekellin	vsrsk]by	strip of fabric on a sail which can be tied to shorten the sail															strip of fabric on a sail which can be tied to shorten the sail		< mekelli-(u)n				mekellin	mekellin	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1085 \
mekestaaghhaq*	vsrscn65f2	small thing		mekestaaghhaaguq \'91it is small\'92; = mekestaaq	little thing												small thing; little thing	vfhjkjcksq\\ vfktymrbq	< meke-staaghhaq				mekestaghhaq*	mekestxghhaq*	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
mekestaaq	vsrscn62	small thing		mekestaaghmeng pilguunga \'91I have a small one\'92; mekestaaghuuq nanughtaa \'91the polar bear he got was a small one\'92; = mekestaaghhaq	little thing												small thing; little thing	vfhjkjcksq\\ vfktymrbq	< meke-staaq				mekestaq	mekestxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
mekiitlek	vsr7nksr	wolf fish			
\f2\i Anarhichas lepturus												
\f0\i0 wolf fish (Anarhichas lepturus)						mekitlek	mekxtlek	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
mekitaghagh-	vsrbnf4f4-	smaller (be somewhat ~)		mekitaghaghtuq \'91it is somewhat smaller\'92 /													to be somewhat smaller		< meke-ataghagh-				mekitaghagh-	mekitaghagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mekitkughmete-	vsrbnre4vsns-	smaller (be somewhat ~)		tiintat sivulighneng mekitkughmetut \'91the tent is somewhat smaller than the first one\'92													to be somewhat smaller		< meke-?-mete\super 1\nosupersub -		VK\'92s notes		mekitkughmete-	mekitkughmete-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mekughmighalek	vsre4vb4fksr	walrus with long tusks that touch or cross at the tips											given in SLI Cur. Man. 60 as mekugmighalek				walrus with long tusks that touch or cross at the tips				VK		mekughmighalek	mekughmighalek	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
melangaaq	vskz362	downy feather		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  melquq	feather, downy	young (very ~ person (slang))											downy feather; very young person (slang)				2nd gloss from VK		melangaq	melangxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u257 \u1179 \
melangute-	vskz3ens-	come into indistinct view through darkness, mist, fog, etc.		melangutuq \'91it came into indistinct view\'92													to come into indistinct view through darkness, mist, fog, etc. 						melangute-	melangute-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
melghutaq	vsk4enf2	water container		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 melghutak
\f2\i , for one container	
\f0\i0 canteen												water container; canteen		< meq-lghutaq				melghutaq	melghutaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
melighte-	vskb5ns-	shamanistic activity (perform ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to perform shamanistic activity				CK Rub 334		melighte-	melighte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
meliqe-	vskb2s-	send word		panigmikun meliqaa \'91she sent word by her daughter\'92	pass the word												to send word; to pass the word		ma\super e\nosupersub -?-		VK		meliqe-	meliqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
meliqi-	vskb2b-	send word by someone		kiiwhken Sivungameng meliqimalghii aqfaaghtesqelluni \'91he (from Savoonga) sent someone (to Gambell) for someone to come get him\'92; apeghiiqufsi meliqilghaasi aqfalleqamsi \'91when you (all) are finished, have someone come (and tell me) and I\'92ll get you\'92													to send word by someone 		< ma\super e\nosupersub -?-		CK A & W 51		meliqi-	meliqi-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1080 -\
melitaqe-	vskbnf2s-	speak harshly to (him)		qepghaallghiit umiilgita sagiqiganniluki melitaqumakangi \'91the foreman spoke harshly to his workers becasue they weren\'92t putting enough effort into their work\'92; angyalgita nunmaagitneng melitaqaqii awen \'91their captain often spoke harshly to them because of their slowness\'92													to speak harshly to (him)		< ma\super e\nosupersub -?-		CK A & W 51		melitaqe-	melitaqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
melite-	vskbns-	discipline with harsh language															to discipline with harsh language		< ma\super e\nosupersub -?-		VK		melite-	melite-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
melkaaghte-	vsk]r65ns-	retrieve from the water		melkaaghtaa \'91he retrieved it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  meq													to retrieve from the water						melkaghte-	melkxghte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mellaate-	vsk]6ns-	trapped by sea ice which has closed in around one (be ~)		angyaghuutkam ilangi mellaasimii \'91some of the boaters have been trapped by the sea ice closing around them\'92; mellaalluki angyat qavaghtaamalghiit \'91the boat was trapped in the ice, and they spent a few nights out there\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 meq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  mellu-													to be trapped by sea ice which has closed in around one				CK A & W 51		mellate-	mellxte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mellig-	vsk]bu-	close tightly		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0  
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  malleg-													to close tightly				CK Rub 335		mellig-	mellig-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1075 -\
melliq	vsk]b2	edible root type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined									
\f0\i0 needs identification				type of edible root (?)				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 64		melliq	melliq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
mellu-	vsk]/-	plug		mellaa \'91he plugged it\'92 / melliiguq \'91he plugged an opening\'92; mellulleqaa \'91he will plug it\'92	cover an opening												to plug; to cover an opening		PE m0lu-				mellu-	mellu-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 -\
mellugraaq	vsk]/uh62	water, bad															bad water		< meq-lluk-raaq				mellugraq	mellugrxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
mellugragh-	vsk]/uhf4-	growl		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to growl		< melluk-ragh-		CK Rub 336		mellugragh-	mellugragh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mellugtuqun	vsk]/[ne2ey	button part of hair beads											what exactly is this?				button part of hair beads				CK Nagai		mellugtuqun	mellugtuqun	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
melluk	vsk]/r	rude person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 rude person	uhe,bzy	< ma\super e\nosupersub -lluk		CK V & E 131		melluk	melluk	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
mellutaq	vsk]/nf2	plug		Qergesem 
\f2\i mellutaa
\f0\i0  igaghqwaaq umuqaq apengtaqa aangyan. \'91I folded over the cardboard window 
\f2\i covering  
\f0\i0 because it was [too] big.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 31)	cover for an opening												plug; cover for an opening		< mellu-(u)taq; PE m0@a3-				mellutaq	mellutaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
melngu, melnguq	vsk3e. vsk3e2	water beetle		Apayepayiiq uteghniimalghii nguuyngaaghaghmun.  
\f2\i Melnguq
\f0\i0  nunmaawhtapagem kinguliiluni kaasimalghii. \'91The spider returned to the fly\'92s house. Because the 
\f2\i beetle
\f0\i0  dallied he returned last.\'92 (SULUWET 33)	beetle (
\f2\i specifically
\f0\i0 , water ~)												beetle; water beetle		PE m0l&u3				melngu, melnguq	melngu, melnguq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 , \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
melqiigh-	vsk]274-	remove fur or hair from skin		melqiightuq \'91it lost (some of its) fur or body hair\'92; melqiighaa \'91he took the fur or body hair off it\'92 /													to remove fur or body hair from skin; to lose fur		< melqugh-(ng)igh-				melqigh-	melqxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1271 -\
melqiighaq	vsk]274f2	dehaired skin (especially, of bearded seal)		= melqiiqaq	sealskin (dehaired skin)												dehaired skin (especially, of bearded seal)		< melqiigh-aq				melqighaq	melqxghaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
melqiin	vsk]27y	rock used to pound sea mammal skin to remove the hair		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rock used to pound sea mammal skin to remove the hair		< melquq-(ng)igh-(u)n		CK Rub 335		melqin	melqxn	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \
melqiiqaq	vsk]272f2	dehaired skin (especially, of bearded seal)		= melqiighaq	sealskin (dehaired skin)												dehaired skin (especially, of bearded seal)		melqiigh-(g)kaq				melqiqaq	melqxqaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
melqiite-	vsk]27ns-	bald (be ~)		= melqite-	hair (have lost one\'92s ~)												to be bald; to have one\'92s lost hair		< melquq-(ng)ite-				melqite-	melqxte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
melqite-	vsk]2bns-	bald (be ~)		= melqiite-	hair (have lost one\'92s ~)												to be bald; to have one\'92s lost hair		< melquq-(ng)ite-				melqite-	melqite-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
melqughqwaaq	vsk]2e52162	feather or fur that has been strewn over an area		qawaagem melqughqwaagha qikmim mingiteghllagumaa \'91the dog has strewn the feathers all over\'92; tamaana melqughqwaaq perngughlluki eggnakesi \'91gather those feathers (that were stewn all over) and throw them away\'92													feather or fur that has been strewn over an area		< melquq-?		CK A & W 51		melqughqwaq	melqughqwxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
melqunge-	vsk]2e3s-	fledged (be ~)			hair (become covered with ~)								looks good				to be fledged; to become covered with hair	jgthznmcz. gjrhsdfnmcz ithcnm/	< melquq-nge-		Rub. 336		melqunge-	melqunge-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1099 -\
melqupak	vsk]2egfr	shaggy or long-haired dog		Qikmighaghhaghnguq 
\f2\i melqupagraaghhaq
\f0\i0  tagiiq naken tamaaken. \'91A 
\f2\i shaggy
\f0\i0  puppy came on the scene.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:208)	arctic loon	loon, arctic								
\f2\i Gavia arctica			
\f0\i0 shaggy or long-haired dog; arctic loon 
\f2\i (Gavia arctica)		
\f0\i0 < melquq-?-				melqupak	melqupak	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
melquq	vsk]2e2	fur		melqwa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  melqwi \'91its fur, its hair\'92	feather	hair (body ~)											fur; feather; body hair		PE m0lqu3				melquq	melquq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
melquvyaaq	vsk]2ed92	hair, fine short or sparse		= melquvzeghaq													fine, short or sparse hair		< melquq-vlaaq				melquvyaq	melquvyxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
melquvzeghaq	vsk]2edps4f2	hair, fine short or sparse		= melquvyaaq													fine, short or sparse hair		< melquq-vleghaq				melquvzeghaq	melquvzeghaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1079 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
melug-	vsk/u-	suck		melugtuq \'91he sucked, smoked\'92; melugaa \'91he smoked or sucked it\'92 / sugukelingiighem melugaa \'91the mosquito bit him (literally, sucked him (i.e., his blood)\'92)	smoke	bite (of mosquito)											to suck; to smoke; to bite (of mosquito)		PE m0lu!-				melug-	melug-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -\
melugragh-	vsk/uhf4-	suck repeatedly		melugraghtuq \'91he kept sucking something\'92; melugraghaa \'91he kept sucking it\'92 /													to repeatedly suck 		< melug-ragh-				melugragh-	melugragh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
melugyaghqaq	vsk/uz52f2	smoking tobacco			tobacco for smoking												smoking tobacco		< melug-yaghqaq				melugyaghqaq	melugyaghqaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
melugyaq	vsk/uz2	jellyfish		
\f2\i said to be so called from the sucking action they make when touched													
\f0\i0 jellyfish		< melug-?-				melugyaq	melugyaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1103 \u1179 \
melyugraagh-	vsk]/uh64-	mutter		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; cf. melyugraaq; this one given as melyugragh-				to mutter	djhxfnm	< ma\super e\nosupersub -?- (?)		Rub. 336		melyugragh-	melyugrxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
melyugraaq	vsk]/uh62	voice, bad		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 bad voice	gkj[jq ujkjc	< ma\super e\nosupersub -?-raaq		Rub. 336		melyugraq	melyugrxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
memeghnaaq	vsvs4y62	stump of tree with roots		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 = mimeghnaaq													tree stump with roots		+ PE mim03naq (under PE mim03) (cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik mim03naq \'91stump of old tree\'92)		CK Rub 336		memeghnaq	memeghnxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
meneq	vsys2	drinking (act of ~)		
\f2\i used in the ablative-modalis as indefinite object of the verb
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to finish\'92: Meghumalghii taagken.  Meneghmeng taaqluni tamaani yuvghiighluni esghapagluni aanumalghii. \'91Then he drank. After he finished drinking he went outside there to look and check on things.\'92 (KALLAG. 10); 
\f2\i see also discussion of
\f0\i0  -neq\super 1 \nosupersub i
\f2\i n the postbase section													
\f0\i0 act of drinking		< megh<e>-neq\super 1				\nosupersub meneq	meneq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
mengag-	vs3fu-	sound (make a vocal ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				to make a vocal sound	ghjbpyjcbnm rfrjq-kb,j pder	< ma\super e\nosupersub -?-		Rub. 336		mengag-	mengag-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1075 -\
mengelgha	vs3sk4f	noise of a lot of people together		mengelghat nagaqughluki takwaaput \'91we heard a lot of people talking and we went to them\'92; neghuullghiit qerngaghllagmeng mengelghangat seghleghllaguuq \'91a large group was eating, and the noise they made was bad\'92													noise of a lot of people together		< ma\super e\nosupersub -?		CK A & W 52		mengelgha	mengelgha	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \
mengelghate-	vs3sk4fns-	for people to talk in a way such that they cannot be understood due to distance, noice, etc.		naken mengelghataqat? \'91where is all the talking coming from?\'92													for people to talk in a way such that they cannot be understood due to distance, noice, etc.		< mengelgha-?-		VK		mengelghate-	mengelghate-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mengghaalugraagh-	vs346k/uh64-	babble (of baby)			mumble	sounds (make non-speech vocal ~)											to babble (of baby); to mumble; to make non-speech vocal sounds		< ma\super e\nosupersub -?				mengghalugragh-	mengghxlugrxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1271 \u257 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
mengghaalugraaq	vs346k/uh62	vocal but non-speech sound(s)			babbling	mumbling											vocal but non-speech sound(s); babbling; mumbling		< ma\super e\nosupersub -?				mengghalugraq	mengghxlugrxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1271 \u257 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
menghu-	vsy4e-	left out (feel ~ when one doesn\'92t receive anything from someone)		ellmi tuuneghinniluni menghuluni nengaamalghii \'91she thought she didn\'92t get anything, so she felt left out and stalked off\'92; ilangi yugem menghuketaghaqluteng ayuqut \'91some people are sensitive about being left out\'92													to feel left out when one doesn\'92t receive anything from someone				CK A & W 52		menghu-	menghu-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 -\
mengileg-	vs3bksu-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > mengilegnagh-, mengilegyagute-, mengilegyug-																			mengileg-	mengileg-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
mengilegnagh-	vs3bksuyf4-	obligation (be such as to cause one to feel an ~ to act (especially, to render aid)															to be such as to cause one to feel an obligation to act (especially, to render aid)		< mengileg-nagh-		VK\'92s notes		mengilegnagh-	mengilegnagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mengilegyagute-	vs3bksumzuens-	tire of being pestered by (him)		Amenam aglaghluni, iitqiinaghluni anenghaghhani qinuyugtaa ughluvghaangliisqelluku, weni qinuyugtaa. Qenwat anengaghhaan 
\f2\i mengilegyagulluku
\f0\i0  amenam yataaghqutuq. \'91Then she went home, and as soon as she came in she started pestering her brother to make a bow. Finally her brother 
\f2\i got tired of being pestered
\f0\i0  and got ready (to make the bow).\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:204)													to tire of being pestered by (him)		< mengileg-yagute-				mengilegyagute-	mengilegyagute-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mengilegyug-	vs34bksu/u-	obliged (feel ~ (due to being cajoled, having one\'92s pity aroused, etc.) to act)		ighneghhaghmi mengilegyugsatni maligtesqelluni qenwat qepghaqani peglluku pimalghii \'91when his son cajoled him, asking him (the father) to go with him, he (the father) finally left his work and did (as requested)\'92													to feel obliged (due to being cajoled, having one\'92s pity aroused, etc.) to act		< mengileg-yug-		CK A & W 52		mengilegyug-	mengilegyug-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1102 \u1075 -\
mengllagh-	vs3k]z4-	melt snow or ice for water		mengllaghtuq \'91he melted snow or ice for water\'92; mengllaghaa \'91he melted it for water\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he melted snow or ice to make water for her\'92 /													to melt snow or ice for water		< meq-ngllagh- 				mengllagh-	mengllagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
mengqughtagh-	vs32e5nf4-	pop gum while chewing it		mengqughtafqaavek \'91stop popping your gum while you chew\'92													to pop gum while chewing it		< mengquq\super 2\nosupersub -?-		VK		mengqughtagh-	mengqughtagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mengqughuute-	vs32e48ns-	popping sound (make a ~)		mengqughuutuq \'91it made a popping sound\'92; mengqughuutaa \'91he made a popping sound with it\'92; \'91 he popped it\'92 /													to make a popping sound		< mengquq-uute\super 1\nosupersub -				mengqughute-	mengqughxte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b mengquq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vs32e2\super \'a1	\nosupersub goose bump		mengqwi \'91his goose bumps\'92; leghlleq ghhiitaqaqa mengqughtupigtuq \'91the goose I plucked has a lot of feather stems\'92	feather stem on birdskin												goose bump; feather stem on birdskin		< ?-quq				mengquql	mengquql	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 1\

\f1\b mengquq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vs32e2\'99	popping sound			sound, popping												popping sound		PY-S m0&quq (under PE 0m0!- or 0mi!-); < ma\super e\nosupersub -?				mengquq2	mengquq2	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 2\
mengteghangwaaq	vs3ns4f3162	cabin 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 seasonal house												cabin; seasonal house	ifkfi. gfkfnrf\\ dhtvtyyjt ;bkbot	< mengtaghaq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK V & E 81		mengteghangwaq	mengteghangwxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
mengteghaq	vs3ns4f2	house		
\f2\i Chukotkan primarily;  this term is used to refer to the traditional Chukchi-style Eskimo dome-shaped house with walrus skin cover held down with rock weights hanging from the edges , called \'91yaranga\'92 in Russian, or to a modern house, as opposed to the earlier semi-subterranean house, 
\f0\i0 nenglu;
\f2\i  the term 
\f0\i0 mengteghapik
\f2\i  is used to distinguish the traditional Chukchi style house from a modern house;
\f0\i0  Yugem pimakangi:  "Aghnani ukughsi,  iightingnga. Maklawaaq tuquskumkun, 
\f2\i mengteghaghpesinun
\f0\i0  aglaghllequsi." \'91The man said to them, \'93You women, hide yourselves. When I kill the caterpillar you will all return to your 
\f2\i houses
\f0\i0 .\'94\'92 (MATERIALY 444); = mangteghaq													house		PE mamt03a3				mengteghaq	mengteghaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
mengulghu-	vs3ek4e-	speak quietly		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 babble												to speak quietly; to babble		< ma\super e\nosupersub -?		CK Rub 337		mengulghu-	mengulghu-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 -\
mengulghuuk	vs3ek48r	hum		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 hum		< ma\super e\nosupersub -?		CK Rub 337		mengulghuk	mengulghxk	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u1263 \u1082 \
mengwaagtagh-	vs316[nf4-	make vocal sounds repeatedly but intermitently		sangwaa mengwaagtaghta? \'91what is making those vocal sounds?\'92													to make vocal sounds repeatedly but intermitently				CK A & W 52		mengwagtagh-	mengwxgtagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mengwaagte-	vs316[ns-	hear vocal sounds repeatedly but intermitently		nunavak uglaneghmini repall mengwaaglluni lliiqayuk \'91when a herd of walrus on ice is numerous, vocal sounds can be heard on and off\'92													to hear vocal sounds repeatedly but intermitently		< ma\super e\nosupersub -?		CK A & W 52		mengwagte-	mengwxgte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mengwaak	vs316r	moaning			groaning	vocal but non-speech sound(s)								voices, unintelligible, heard in the distance			moaning; groaning; vocal but non-speech sound(s); unintelligible voices heard in the distance		< ma\super e\nosupersub -(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				mengwak	mengwxk	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1082 \
mengyagh-	vs3z4-	attract unwanted spirits especially from the ocean by making excessive noise															to attract unwanted spirits especially from the ocean by making excessive noise		< ma\super e\nosupersub -?; cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik n0p0&ya3- with the same meaning as here (and note that there n0p0- is cognate to m0- here)				mengyagh-	mengyagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1103 \u1271 -\
mengyaq	vs3z2	spirit, unwanted, attracted by excessive noise															unwanted spirit attracted by excessive noise		< ma\super e\nosupersub -?-				mengyaq	mengyaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1103 \u1179 \
menqeqengeltagh-	vs32s2s3sk]nf4-	crackle		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 click								check this and try to figure out the postbase				to crackle; to click	gjnhtcrbdfnm. gjotkrbdfnm	< mengquq\super 2\nosupersub -?		Rub. 337		menqeqengeltagh-	menqeqengeltagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
menutu-	vsyene-	forceful (be ~)		menutuuq \'91it was forceful\'92 / akuziiq menutuluni \'91he spoke loudly\'92; nuna aaghhaghtuq menutuluni \'91the earthquake was strong\'92	loud (be ~)	strong (be ~)											to be forceful, loud, strong						menutu-	menutu-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 -\
menutuqaq	vsyene2f2	loud sound (of knocking, shouting etc.)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				loud sound (of knocking, shouting etc.)	cbkmysq. uhjvrbq. joenbvsq \'f8cner. rhbr b n>g>\uc0\u960 	< menutu-qaq		Rub. 336		menutuqaq	menutuqaq	\u1084 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
mepik	vsgbr	water, fresh and good															good fresh water		< meq-pik				mepik	mepik	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
meq	vs2	water		meghqun \'91down to the ocean\'92; meghmi \'91in the water, in the ocean\'92; meghek 
\f2\i (dual)
\f0\i0  \'91large vessel for melting snow for water or for storing water in the house; polynya; open area of water in pack ice\'92; Tawaten malleglutek 
\f2\i mengunani
\f0\i0  kiyaghtuq. \'91It (the ice) would come in [to shore] and it would stay that way without there being any [open] 
\f2\i water
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:154); 
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  megh<e>- \'91to drink\'92, 
\f2\i the verbal counterpart of the noun base	
\f0\i0 ocean	vessel for melting snow for water								polynya			water; ocean; vessel for melting snow for water 
\f2\i (when used in dual)
\f0\i0 ; area of open water in pack ice; polynya		PE 0m03(-)			; > meghaaq, meghaq, meghataq, meghek, meghllagek, meghnak, meghqe-, meghquute-, meghraag-, meghragti-, meghsi-, meghtagh-, melghutaq, melkaaghte-, mellugraaq, mengllagh-, mepik; cf. mesak, mesaqe, mesiiq, mesuq, miigh-, miite- [1]	meq	meq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \
meqaq	vs2f2	hide that has been processed, usually by aging, to remove hair or fur		meqaq akmagtangllaghnaken \'91make a bag out of the proccesed hide\'92; amiirameng meqameng nateghqaghqiisiin \'91do you have any proccessed hide for boot soles?													hide that has been processed, usually be aging, to remove hair or fur		< meqe-aq		CK A & W 52; Rub 333		meqaq	meqaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
meqe-	vs2s-	shed hair		mequq \'91it (area of skin)  shed\'92; meqaa \'91it (animal) shed\'92 /meqetaa \'91he removed the hair from it\'92													to shed hair		PY-S m0q0-				meqe-	meqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
Meqegtaq	Vs2s5nf2	Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. (projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus toward east end of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus toward east end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.						Meqegtaq	Meqegtaq	\uc0\u1052 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
meqenghaq	vs2sy4f2	furless one		meqenghaq yuuk tamaa kaasimaaq \'91a bald headed man has arrived\'92; amiiraq meqenghaq egsimaat \'91they threw away the furless sealskin\'92	hairless one	bald person (slang)											one that is or has become furless or hairless; bald person (slang)				CK A & W 52		meqenghaq	meqenghaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
meqesigh-	vs2scb4-	cause a skin to shed its hair by allowing it to age															to cause a skin to shed its hair by allowing it to age		< meqe-sigh-				meqesigh-	meqesigh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
meqete-	vs2sns-	lips (put one\'92s ~ together)		Pugimaghnaqngama 
\f2\i meqellunga
\f0\i0  meghmun qetgeghtunga. \'91When I was ready to swim, I put my lips together and jumped into the water.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 87); meqenneqesgsaghtuq \'91he kept his lips tightly shut\'92; meqetngwaaghtuq \'91he closed his mough tightly\'92	close one's mouth tightly												to put one's lips together; to close one's mouth tightly						meqete-	meqete-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
meqlegh-	vs2k]s4-	lacking something		sameng piyugnameng meqleghluteng anglikat \'91they were raised without having wanted things (i.e., popular toys)\'92	poor (be ~)	short of something (be ~)								need (be in need of something)			to lack something; to be poor; to be short of something; to be in need of something				CK A & W 52		meqlegh-	meqlegh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 -\
meqleqe-	vs2k]s2s-	lack (it)		tamaana meqleqluku ayuqaat \'91they were in need of those things\'92	need (be in ~ of (it))												to lack (it); be in need of (it)		< meqlegh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -		CK A & W 52		meqleqe-	meqleqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
meqralqagh-	vs2ifk]2f4-	furless (be partially ~)		amiiraq una meqralqaghtupigta \'91this seal skin has a lot of bald spots\'92; meqralqiisaqumi piniimayaghta \'91if it didn\'92t have bald spots it would\'92ve been good\'92	bald spots (have ~)												to be partially furless; to have bald spots						meqralqagh-	meqralqagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
meqralqaq	vs2ifk]2f2	bald spot(s)		meqralqaa ilaaghluku enan pinaken \'91just patch the bald spots (of the skin)\'92													bald spot(s)						meqralqaq	meqralqaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
meqsaghtugh-	vs2cz5ne4-	go quench one's thirst		meqsaghtughtuq \'91he went for water to drink\'92													to go quench one's thirst		PY m0qya3tu3- (under PE 0m03(-)); < megh-yaghtugh-				meqsaghtugh-	meqsaghtugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
meqsug-	vs2c/u-	thirsty (be ~)		meqsugtuq \'91he's thirsty\'92 /													to be thirsty		PY-S 0m0qyu!- (under PE 0m03(-)); < megh-yug-				meqsug-	meqsug-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
meraaghinaq	vsh64byf2	water, open		meghek uqlightekagka saallgaak meraaghinaatalghiik \'91the place where I was hunting had nothing but water, but ice formed on it\'92; meraaghinaghmi aghvengut \'91they caught a whale in open water\'92	water (nothing but ~)												open water; nothing but water		< meq-?-(ng)inaq		CK A & W 52		meraghinaq	merxghinaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
Meregta	Vshs[nf	Maruwtu Point site on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Maruwtu Point site on St. Lawrence Is.						Meregta	Meregta	\uc0\u1052 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \

\f1\b Meregtemmii(t)
\f2\i\b0  	
\f0\i0 Vshs[nsv]7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)											deR. (pg. 352) says this is from Chukchi, but what is the source?; VK\'92s notes				a particular clan		< Meregta-mii	09, 14		xxxt	Meregtemi(t) 	Meregtemx(t) 	\u1052 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1100 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
mesagh-	vscz4-	dip something (food) into oil or the like		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				to dip something (food) into oil or the like	vfrfnm	PE m0ca3- (?)		Rub. 339		mesagh-	mesagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
mesak	vsczr	bog		mesagtuuq \'91it is boggy, swampy\'92													bog		PE m0ca!				mesak	mesak	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
mesamsug-	vsczvc/u-	snack		mesamsugtuq \'91he nibbled\'92	nibble												to snack; to nibble						mesamsug-	mesamsug-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
mesaqaaghaq* 	vscz264f2	snow bunting		
\f2\i more generally, any small bird or chick; 
\f0\i0 Kingugmeng qerngughtiikut 
\f2\i mesaqaaghaghnun
\f0\i0  neghesaghqameng. \'91We gathered worms for feeding to the 
\f2\i little birds
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 100)	
\f2\i Plectrophenax nivalis	
\f0\i0 white wagtail								
\f2\i Motacilla alba			
\f0\i0 snow bunting 
\f2\i (Plectrophenax nivalis)
\f0\i0 ; white wagtail 
\f2\i (Motacilla alba)						
\f0\i0 mesaqaghaq* 	mesaqxghaq* 	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
mesaqe-	vscz2s-	smack with the lips			smack feet or the like on wet surface												to smack with the lips; to smack feet or the like on wet surface		PE m0ca3-				mesaqe-	mesaqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 -\
mesaqegtagh-	vscz2s[nf4-	sound (make a smacking ~ with the feet in the mud)			smack feet in mud												to make a smacking sound with the feet in mud		< mesaqe-?-				mesaqegtagh-	mesaqegtagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mesigha-, mesighagh-	vscb4f-. vscb4f4-	deny one's guilt		mesighaaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  mesighaghtuq \'91he denied doing what he did\'92 / mesighakaa \'91he denied doing it\'92	deny doing what one really did do												to deny one's guilt; to deny doing what one really did do		PE m0ci3a3-				mesigha-, mesighagh-	mesigha-, mesighagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 -, \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b mesiigh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vsc74-\super \'a1	\nosupersub dip food into oil preparatory to eating it		mesiightuq \'91he dipped food into oil (and ate it)\'92; mesiighaa \'91he dipped it into oil (and ate it)\'92 /	eat, dipping the food into oil first												to dip food into oil preparatory to eating it; to eat, dipping the food into oil first		PE m0ci3a3 (under PE m0cu(!) or m0cu3)				mesigh-1	mesxgh-1	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub mesiigh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vsc74-\super \'99	\nosupersub remove liquid from (it)		mesiighaa \'91he removed the liquid from it\'92 / 													to remove liquid from (it)		< mesuq-(ng)igh-				mesigh-2	mesxgh-2	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub mesiighqe-	vsc752s-	oil		mesiighquq \'91he got oily, or put oil on himself\'92; mesiighqaa \'91he put oil on it, oiled it\'92 /	get oil on	put oil on								get oily			to oil; to get oily; to get or put oil on		< mesiiq-ghqe\super 2\nosupersub -				mesighqe-	mesxghqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
mesiighqusiq	vsc752ecb2	kerosene															kerosene		< mesiighqe-(u)siq				mesighqusiq	mesxghqusiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
mesiighquute-	vsc7528nf26	cook in oil		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 drop into oil												to cook in oil; to drop into oil	dfhbnm d ;bhe xnj-k>,.  hjyznm d ;bh xnj-k. 	< mesiighqe-?-		Rub. 339 CK		mesighqute-	mesxghqxte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u257 \
mesiilghutaq	vsc7k4enfr	vessel for holding or storing oil			gas can	oil can							looks okay				vessel for holding or storing oil; gas can; oil can	gjcelf lkz njgktyjuj ;bhf	< mesiiq-lghutaq		Rub. 338 CK		mesilghutaq	mesxlghutaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \

\f1\b mesiina\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vsc7yf\super s	\nosupersub sewing machine		kakiiquq mesiinekun \'91she is sewing with a sewing machine\'92	machine												sewing machine; machine		from English \'91machine\'92, and/or Russian vfibyf (mashina) \'91machine\'92 	SLI			mesinae	mesxnae	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1099 \
mesiipik	vsc7gbr	seal oil			oil (seal ~)												seal oil		< mesiiq-pik				mesipik	mesxpik	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
mesiiq	vsc72	oil		mesiighrugnilnguq \'91greasy food\'92; mesiingllaghtuq he's making oil from solid fat\'92	oil dip for food												oil; oil dip for food		PE m0ci3a3 (under PE m0cu(!) or m0cu3)				mesiq	mesxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
mesughsugni-	vsc/5c/uyb-	clear (be a ~ liquid)															to be a clear liquid		< mesuq-?-				mesughsugni-	mesughsugni-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 -\
mesughtuqaq	vsc/5ne2f2	liquid (something with a high ~ content)															something with a high liquid content		< mesugh-tuqaq				mesughtuqaq	mesughtuqaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
mesughtuqe-	vsc/5ne2s-	ooze			run (of a sore or cut)												to ooze or run (of a sore or cut)		< mesuq-?-				mesughtuqe-	mesughtuqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
mesugusugnagh-	vsc/uec/uyf4-	swampy (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukoktan (R)													
\f0\i0 to be swampy				CK Rub 339		mesugusugnagh-	mesugusugnagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mesunge-	vsc/3s-	wet (get ~)		mesunguq \'91it got wet (as from rain)\'92 /	soaked (get ~)												to get wet; to get soaked		PE m0cu&0- (uunder PE m0cu(!) or m0cu3); < mesuq-nge-				mesunge-	mesunge-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1099 -\
mesungesak	vsc/3sczr	killer whale			whale (killer ~)	orca								
\f2\i Orcinus orca			
\f0\i0 killer whale; orca
\f2\i  (Orcinus orca)						
\f0\i0 mesungesak	mesungesak	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
mesungleqe-	vsc/3ks2s-	soaked (get thoroughly ~)		= mesungteqe-													to get thoroughly soaked		mesunge-?-		VK		mesungleqe-	mesungleqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
mesungteqe-	vsc/3ns2s-	soaked (get thoroughly ~)		= mesungleqe-													to get thoroughly soaked		mesunge-?-		VK		mesungteqe-	mesungteqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
mesuq	vsc/2	liquid		mesughtuuq \'91it is juicy, wet through and through\'92; Nunivak paga 
\f2\i mesughllaguuq
\f0\i0  eslallugem kingunganeng. \'91The tundra up there is full of 
\f2\i water
\f0\i0  after the rain.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 98)	juice	water in marshland								wetness on clothing			liquid; juice; water in marshland; wetness on clothing		PE m0cu(!) or m0cu3			; > mesughtuqaq, mesiigh-, mesughsugni, mesughtuqe-, mesunge-	mesuq	mesuq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \
mesuuna	vsc0yf	comb		
\f2\i also used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 mesuunat
\f2\i , for one comb	
\f0\i0 hairbrush												comb; hairbrush (by extension)		from Chukchi m0cune&, pl. m0cune&et \'91comb\'92	14		mesuunavaget	mesuna	mesxna	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1085 \u1072 \
mesuuna-	vsc0yf-	comb the hair		mesuunaaq \'91he combed his (own) hair\'92; mesuunaa \'91he combed his (another's) hair\'92 / Fast-eneghpeni aghmigaqillu 
\f2\i mesuunaaqillu
\f0\i0 , ilagpenun nallukesqelluku fast-ellghen. \'91When you fast, wash your face and 
\f2\i comb your hair
\f0\i0  and don\'92t let your fellows know that you are fasting.\'92 (Matthew 6.17-18)	brush the hair												to comb the hair; to brush the hair (by extension)		from Chukchi m0cune&, pl. m0cune&et \'91comb\'92				mesuna-	mesxna-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1085 \u1072 -\
mesuunavak	vsc0yfdfs	ice pick, large		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  mesuunavaget, 
\f2\i for one pick													
\f0\i0 large ice pick		< mesuuna-vak				mesunavak	mesxnavak	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1099 \
metagh-	vsnf4-	smother															to smother						metagh-	metagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
meteghlluk	vsns5k]/r	raven, common		
\f2\i Meteghllugllagnguq
\f0\i0  taana estaaghaamalghii. \'91That big 
\f2\i raven
\f0\i0  was out sliding on the snow.\'92 (KALLAG. 17);  Ungipaghaninguq imani 
\f2\i meteghlluget
\f0\i0 , anipat qateperewaaghuyalghiit.  Anipankuk 
\f2\i meteghllugenkuk
\f0\i0  piniqutepigsalghiik, quunpeng qerngaghmetaqelghiik. \'91In the story it is said that back then 
\f2\i ravens
\f0\i0  and owls were white in color. The owl and the 
\f2\i raven
\f0\i0  were friends, always staying with each other.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:222)
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  metghaq	
\f2\i Corvus corax												
\f0\i0 common raven (Corvus corax)		PY-S m0t0X@uk (under PE m0t03)				meteghlluk	meteghlluk	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
meteghyaq	vsns4mz2	eyebrow		meteghyanka \'91my eyebrows\'92	eyebrow hair	partition on a seal-oil lamp											eyebrow; eyebrow hair; partition on a seal-oil lamp		PY-S m0t03yaq		gloss 3 Rub 340		meteghyaq	meteghyaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
metenge-	vsns3s-	fly up suddenly		anipam qawaak naluguma akuqaghluku metengaghaghtuq \'91the owl  grabbed a landed bird and suddenly flew upward\'92; tengegkayuk nalugnaqsaghluni metenguq quulmun \'91the airplane was going to land, but it suddenly ascended\'92	ascend suddenly												to suddenly fly up; to suddenly ascend		PE m0t0&@0(3)-		CK A & W 53		metenge-	metenge-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 -\
metengqe-	vsns32s-	big (be too ~ to fit (garment))		mekelghiighem atkuni metengqaa \'91the boy outgrew his parka\'92; aatkani metengqelluki lliighii angliyalghiimi \'91he can\'92t fit his clothes anymore because he has grown\'92	fit (not  ~ (garment) because it is too small)	small (not fit (garment) because it is too ~)								outgrow (garment)			to be too big to fit (garment); to not fit (garment) because it is too small; to outgrow (garment)				CK A & W 53		metengqe-	metengqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1099 -\
metengtaq	vsns3nf2	dorsal fin			fin, dorasal 												dorsal fin		PY m0t0&taq				metengtaq	metengtaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
metghaghrak	vsn5f4hfr	edible plant that grows in sandy soil		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	Honckenya or Arenaria peploides	
\f0\i0 oysterleafs								
\f2\i Mertensia maritime			
\f0\i0 a certain edible plant that grows in sandy soil 
\f2\i (Honckenya or Arenaria peploides); 
\f0\i0 oysterleafs 
\f2\i (Mertensia maritime)		
\f0\i0 < metghaq-?-				metghaghrak	metghaghrak	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
metghaq, metghapik	vsn5f2. vsn5fgbr	eider, common		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  meteghlluk	
\f2\i Somateria mollissima	
\f0\i0 parka made of eider skin with feathers											common eider (Somateria mollissima) ; parka made of eider skin with feathers		PE m0t03				metghaq, metghapik	metghaq, metghapik	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 , \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1203 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
metghiq	vsn5b2	stitch type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 type of stitch				see SLI Cur. Res. Man. 85		metghiq	metghiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1203 \u1080 \u1179 \
metigh-	vsnb4-	make a sly remark															to make a sly remark		ma\super e\nosupersub -?-		VK		metigh-	metigh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\
metngaamsiig-	vsn3]6vc7u-	hop around (of bird or person)		metngaamsiigtuq \'91he or it is hopping around\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 metngegh-													to hop around (of bird or person)						metngamsig-	metngxmsxg-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u257 \u1084 \u1089 \u1251 \u1075 -\

\f1\b metngegh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vsn3]s4-\super \'a1	\nosupersub steal away		metngeghtuq \'91he stole away\'92 / metngeghtestaa \'91he caused her to leave without telling anyone\'92; metngeqaghvikaa \'91he stole a quick visit to her\'92													to steal away; to kidnap						metngegh-1	metngegh-1	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub metngegh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vsn3]s4-\super \'99	\nosupersub leap		metngeghtuq \'91he or it sprung up\'92	jump	spring up											to leap; to jump; spring up		PE m0t&03-				metngegh-1	metngegh-1	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub metngeghute-	vsn3]s4ens-	kidnap		metngeghutaa \'91he stole away with it; kidnapped him\'92 / Tannget 
\f2\i metngeghutkaat
\f0\i0 , igleghtengngiinaamaluku qenwat upenghaamalghii. \'91The nomads 
\f2\i stole him away, kidnapped him
\f0\i0 , and they were still traveling in springtime.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 77)	run off taking (him/it)	steal away with (him/it)											to kidnap; to run off or steal away taking (him/it)		metngegh\super 1\nosupersub -(u)te-				metngeghute-	metngeghute-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
metngeqagh-	vsn3]s2f4-	jump quickly or far		Quyillegni qepghaghluni, qepghaghluni aghyuqsami 
\f2\i metngeqaqruguftuq
\f0\i0 . \'91He worked for the Chukchi, and as he worked when he became homesick, he 
\f2\i made his escape
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:124)									check				to jump quickly or far	ghsufnm yf lfktrjt hfccnjzybt	< metngegh\super 2\nosupersub -qagh- 		Rub. 340, VK		metngeqagh-	metngeqagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
metughi-	vsne4b-	louder (get ~)		metughiiq 'it got louder'													to get louder		< ma\super e\nosupersub -tu-(gh/l)i-				metughi-	metughi-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 -\
mevliighqe-	vsdk752s-	speak loudly and/or unintelligibly due to anger		sameng taana mevliighqaqa? \'91what is he speaking angrily about?\'92; tazingkuk esgha sameng mevliighqullghiik \'91those two over there are speaking loudly at each other\'92	angrily speak with a raised voice												to speak loudly and/or unintelligibly due to anger; to speak angrily with a raised voice				CK A & W 53		mevlighqe-	mevlxghqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
mezighqumangilnguq*	vspb52evf3bk3e2	sloppy person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 untidy person												one who is sloppy, untidy				CK Rub 333		mezighqumangilnguq*	mezighqumangilnguq*	\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1079 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
mighu-	vb4e-	unappetizing		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  mighukaa \'91he finds it unappetizing\'92; mighuyugtuq \'91he finds something unappetizing\'92; mighunaghtuq \'91it is unappetizing\'92; mighuyuglunga neghenghitunga \'91I didn\'92t eat because I found the food unappetizing\'92 ; qawaagmeng aghipaan neghelghiit mighuyugtaatnga \'91watching them eating eat raw bird \'93grossed me out\'94\'92													unappetizing				CK A & W 53		mighu-	mighu-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 -\
mighyagh-	vb4mz4-	vomit		mighyaghtuq \'91he vomited\'92; mighyaghaa \'91he vomited it out, or vomited on it\'92 / mighyaghnaghtuq \'91it makes one vomit or want to vomit\'92; mighyaghyugtuq \'91he feels nauseated\'92													to vomit		PE mi3ya3(-)				mighyagh-	mighyagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
mighyasnguyug-	vb4mzc3]e/u-	nauseated (feel ~)		mighyasnguyugtuq \'91he feels nauseated\'92 / 													to feel nauseated		< mighyagh-?-yug-		VK		mighyasnguyug-	mighyasnguyug-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1089 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1102 \u1075 -\
mighyasnguyuk	vb4mzc3]e/r	nausea															nausea		< mighyagh-?-yug-		Rub.		mighyasnguyuk	mighyasnguyuk	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1089 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1102 \u1082 \
mighyastaq	vb4mzcnf2	weak stomach (one with a ~)															one with a weak stomach		< mighyagh-?		VK		mighyastaq	mighyastaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
miglegrungiq	vbuksuhe3b2	walrus, young tusked female, with calf		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 meke-; = minglegruniiq													young female tusked walrus with calf						miglegrungiq	miglegrungiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
miigh-	v74-	melt snow or ice for water		miightuq \'91he melted snow or ice\'92; miighaa \'91he melted it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  meq													to melt snow or ice for water						migh-	mxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1271 -\
miigtagh-	v7[nf4-	pounding noise (make ~)		Aqlaghaghhneghaniqun mangteghat saaqelghiit 
\f2\i miigtaghaqelghiit
\f0\i0  wetngaaqwaaqelghiit aqlaghami. \'91Whenever it got cold the houses would make a 
\f2\i thudding noise
\f0\i0  and creak in the cold.\'92  (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:260)	noise (make pounding, booming, knocking or thudding ~)	thudding noise (make ~)								knocking noise (make ~)			to make pounding, booming, knocking or thudding noise		< miik-?-		Rub. 329, VK		miktagh-	mxktagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
miigte-	v7[ns-	drumming (hold a ~ singing and dance session in a newly completed house)		taakunnguq miignaqut \'91they say those people are going to hold a drumming singing and dance session in their new house\'92													to hold a drumming, singing and dance session in a newly completed house		< miik-?		CK A & W 53 CK		migte-	mxgte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
miiguute-	v7u8ns-	bang		Iiwen unugaqaa qakma 
\f2\i miiguutuq
\f0\i0 . Kii, ilutmun aneghsalghiimi, uka qagit iteghtut taghyut. Qagighllagaat, nenglu eslemkaghaghtaat, \'85. \'91Just when night came there was 
\f2\i pounding
\f0\i0  out there. Gee, when he tried to breathe, the sea waves came in. Big waves came into it and filled the house, \'85.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:16)	tap	pound							looks good				to bang; to tap; to pound (not with hand)	cnexfnm xtv-kb,j \'f8yt herjq\uc0\u960 	< miik-uute-		Rub. 324 CK		migute-	mxgxte-	\u1084 \u1251 \u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
miik	v7r	loud noise, like thunder			noise, loud like thunder												loud noise, like thunder		PE 0m0!- or 0mi!-				mik	mxk	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1082 \
miikevleghaq	v7rsdks4f2	noise, faint or distant															faint or distant noise		< miik-?-vleghaq		VK		mikevleghaq	mxkevleghaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
miinglun	v73k/y	wall		Nunivagem tungangani nenglumi 
\f2\i miinglutanga
\f0\i0  qelpeghsimakanga. Awergha nusugraamakanga. \'91Then she uncovered the 
\f2\i wall
\f0\i0  on the side of the semi-subterranean house facing the tundra. She pulled out furs.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. 1:26)													wall						minglun	mxnglun	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1085 \
miisigh-	v7cb4-	soak		miisightuq \'91he soaked something\'92; miisighaa \'91he soaked it\'92 /													to soak		< miite-sigh-				misigh-	mxsigh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
miisiisiq	v7c7cb2	vessel for soaking things		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  miisiisik, 
\f2\i for one such vessel													
\f0\i0 vessel for soaking things		< miisigh-(u)siq		VK		misisiq	mxsxsiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1089 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
miita	v7nf	this time act differently		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle; cf. 
\f0\i0  emta	differently (this time act ~)	change (for a ~)											this time act differently; for a change		from Chukchi mit\'92e \'91of course; beforehand\'92				mita	mxta	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \
miitalgi	v7nfkub	without fail		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle	
\f0\i0 certainly	expected (as ~)											without fail; certainly; as expected	j,zpfntkmyj. ytghtvtyyj	from Chukchi miit\'92al!i \'91undoubtedly\'92 (?)		Rub. 328		mitalgi	mxtalgi	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1080 \

\f1\b miite-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub v7ns-\'a1			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0   > miisigh-, miitghutaq; 
\f2\i cf
\f0\i0 . meq															PE 0mmit-				mite-1	mxte-1	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub miite-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub v7ns-\'99	whaling ritual (follow one\'92s husband around as he engages in a certain ~)															to follow one\'92s husband around as he engages in a certain ritual after catching a whale				VK\'92s notes		mite-2	mxte-2	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub miitghutaq	v7n5enf2	vessel for soaking things															vessel for soaking things		< miite\super 1\nosupersub -?-(u)taq				mitghutaq	mxtghutaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
miiwen	v71sy	maybe		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle; 
\f0\i0 Aliighwaaghaa 
\f2\i miiwen
\f0\i0  tengegkayuget tagillequt. \'91The weather is very clear so 
\f2\i maybe
\f0\i0  the airplane will come.\'92 (Akiingqwagh. 114); Aghtughluku tuqlughaghaataneghmeng 
\f2\i miiwen
\f0\i0  sivumeggni atghaamanayukan aghnaghaat mengteghamun atghaamalghiit. \'91When they had no success in calling her, they thought she 
\f2\i might
\f0\i0  have gone ahead of them, so the girls went toward home.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAH. 150) 													maybe		from Chukchi mew0n \'91?\'92		Akiingqwaghneghet 114		miwen	mxwen	\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \
miksagaghpak	vbrczuf5gfr	walrus, four year old bull															four year old bull walrus		< miksagaq-ghpak				miksagaghpak	miksagaghpak	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
miksagaq	vbrczuf2	walrus, two year old bull		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  meke-													two year old bull walrus						miksagaq	miksagaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
mileg-	vbksu-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > milegmiqe-, milegnatun, milegtaagh-																			mileg-	mileg-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
milegmiqe-	vbksuvb2s-	sad (make or be made ~)		milegmiquq \'91he has been saddened by someone or something\'92; milegmiqaa \'91he or it made her feel sad\'92 / Nanevgaghllagem yaghlegi taghnughhaghhaak 
\f2\i milegmiqaak
\f0\i0 . Ellngannguq uyvalalukek tuququmaftaak angayuqakek. \'91The old man made the children 
\f2\i sad
\f0\i0 . He said that he\'92d killed their parents with sorcery.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 37)	sadden												to be made sad; to make sad; to sadden		< mileg-miqe-				milegmiqe-	milegmiqe-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
milegnatun	vbksuyfney	sadness (causing ~)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 causing sadness		< mileg-naq-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 milegnatun	milegnatun	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
milegtaagh-	vbks[n64-	sad (feel ~)		milegtaaghtuq \'91he feels sad, downhearted, depressed\'92 /	depressed (be ~)	downhearted (be ~)											to feel sad; to be downhearted; to be depressed		< mileg-?-				milegtagh-	milegtxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
milek	vbksr	patch on boot sole		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 patch on boot sole				CK Rub 325		milek	milek	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
milugh-	vbk/4-	throw something or throw something at (him/it)		milughtuq \'91he threw something\'92; milughaa \'91he threw something at her or it\'92 / milughaa qikmiq uyghagmeng \'91he threw a rock at the dog\'92; miluutaa \'91he threw it somewhere\'92													to throw something; to throw something at (him/it)		PE milu3-			 > milugmig-, miluqutaq	milugh-	milugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 -\
milughmig-	vbk/4vbu-	throw things (especially, rocks) at (him/it)		milughmigaa \'91he threw things at her\'92 /													to throw things (especially, rocks) at (him/it)		< milugh-?				milughmig-	milughmig-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
milughru	vbk/4he	nine (the number ~ in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)		
\f2\i the entire jingle is:
\f0\i0  aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'	counting jingle (the number \'91nine\'92 in a ~ or finger naming jingle for children)	jingle (the number \'91nine\'92 in a counting or finger naming ~ for children)											the number nine (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)						milughru	milughru	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \
miluqutaq	vbk/2enf2	sea creature, edible, with tough skin and dark orange insides		
\f2\i said to be so called because it is thrown to the ground in order to kill it;
\f0\i0  
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; Miluqutat
\f0\i0  miluqutaqelghiini uniiqayuget. \'91
\f2\i This kind of sea creature
\f0\i0  when thrown down repeatedly becomes soft [dies and is edible].\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 101)									exact identification?				edible sea creature with tough skin and dark orange insides		< milugh-qutaq				miluqutaq	miluqutaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
miluta	vek/nf	ice (first fall ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 milutek													first fall ice				CK Rub 326		miluta	miluta	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1090 \u1072 \
miluusaghqaq	vbk0cz52f2	offering (usually a piece of meat)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 offering (usually a piece of meat)		< milugh-(u)te-yaghqaq		CK Rub 326		milusaghqaq	milxsaghqaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
miluute-	vbk0ns-	throw (it)		miluutaa \'91he threw it\'92 / miluutaa uyghak qikmimun \'91he threw the rock at a dog\'92													to throw (it)		< milugh-(u)te-				milute-	milxte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\
miluyagaghpaghqu-	vbk/zuf4gf52e-	step with big strides (as in a certain competition)		Yugem qawaagtani unguvaasaghluku meghmun ateghtestegpenaan malighqaghyaqminigu 
\f2\i miluyagaghpaghquyalghiimi
\f0\i0  aga tugaa. \'91The man injured the bird he shot, and before it got to the water 
\f2\i he stepped with big strides
\f0\i0 , so he was able to take it.\'92 (SULUWET 109)													
\f4 to step with big strides (as in a certain competition)
\f7 						
\f0 miluyagaghpaghqu-	miluyagaghpaghqu-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 -\
mimeghnaaq	vbvs4y62	stump of tree with roots		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 = memeghnaaq													tree stump with roots		+ PE mim03naq (under PE mim03) (cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik mim03naq \'91stump of old tree\'92)		CK Rub 336		mimeghnaq	mimeghnxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
minagh-	vbyf4-	bring food over to people in a different place															to bring food over to people in a different place		PE mina3-				minagh-	minagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mineq	vbys2	scum		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 scum		PE min0!\super 1\nosupersub  or PE min0!\super 2\nosupersub  (?)		CK Rub 327		mineq	mineq	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
mingilate-	vb3bkzns-	scatter		mingilatut \'91they are scattered\'92; mingilatii \'91he scattered them\'92 / mingilatiiq \'91he scattered things\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mingla\super e	\nosupersub strew												to scatter; to strew						mingilate-	mingilate-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mingite-	vb3bns-	scatter		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mingilate-	strew												to scatter; to strew						mingite-	mingite-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b mingla\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vb3kz\super s	\nosupersub wall		Naaygham 
\f2\i minglengiighhaakun
\f0\i0  igleghutukut. \'91We walked along the 
\f2\i side
\f0\i0  of the mountain.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 101); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mingllun	fence	boundary								horizon			wall; fence; boundary; side of mountain at base; horizon		PY-S mi&l0				minglae	minglae	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
minglegruniiq	vb3ksuhey72	walrus, young tusked female, with calf		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  meke-; = miglegrungiq													young female tusked walrus with calf				CK Rub 327 CK		minglegruniq	minglegrunxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1085 \u1251 \u1179 \
mingllegte-	vb3k]s[ns-	tidy up		mingllegtuq \'91he tidied up\'92; mingllegtaa \'91he tidied it up\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mingla	straighten up												to tidy up; to straighten up						mingllegte-	mingllegte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mingllite-	vb3k]bns-	put away		mingllitaa \'91he put it away\'92 / mingllitiiq \'91he put something away\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 mingla													to put away						mingllite-	mingllite-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mingllu-	vb3k]/-	pile sod against the wall of house (as to insulate it); to insulate the wall(s)		Mangteghat 
\f2\i mingllulghiini
\f0\i0 , supugiitkayuget. \'91When 
\f2\i sod is piled against the walls 
\f0\i0 of a house, it cuts the draft.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 101); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 mingla													to pile sod against the wall of house (as to insulate it); to insulate the wall(s)				VK		mingllu-	mingllu-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 -\
mingllun	vb3k]/y	wall		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mingla\super e	\nosupersub fence	boundary											wall; fence; boundary						mingllun	mingllun	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \
mingug-	vb3eu-	rub		mingugtuq \'91he rubbed himself (e.g. his eyes)\'92; mingugaa \'91he rubbed it\'92 / mingugutuq \'91he rubbed or brushed himself against something\'92; mingugiiq \'91he rubbed something\'92													to rub		PE mi&u!-			; > mingughhu-, mingugusik	mingug-	mingug-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1075 -\
mingughhu-	vb3e5e-	smear something onto (it)		mingughhwaak tipelek sunameng \'91he smeared the table with dirt\'92; mingughhutaa suna tipelegnun \'91he smeared dirt all over the table\'92	dirty (get ~)												to smear something onto (it); to get dirty		< mingug-?-				mingughhu-	mingughhu-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1091 -\
mingugusiq	vb3euecb2	washboard		
\f2\i used in the dual
\f0\i0 , mingugusik,
\f2\i  for one washboard													
\f0\i0 washboard		< mingug-(u)siq				mingugusiq	mingugusiq	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
mingwaagtuute-	vb316[n8ns-	rub oneself on, in, or with something		Pangalwaaghluni, pangalwaaghluni, ufsughqutaqluni, 
\f2\i mingwaagtuulluni
\f0\i0  anigukun pangalwaaghluni, \'85 \'91He [wolf] ran around and ran around, shook himself, 
\f2\i rubbed himself 
\f0\i0 in the snow, and ran around some more, \'85\'92 (KALLAG. 21); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  mingug-													to rub oneself on, in, or with something						mingwagtute-	mingwxgtxte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mitegha	vbns4f	ochre		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 red dye stone								used also on SLI?				ochre; red dye stone		PE ivit03a3				mitegha	mitegha	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \
mitghugh-	vbn5e4-	go somewhere but not return as expected		aghvighluni mitghuqaaguq \'91he left (to the mainland) and hasn\'92t come back\'92; akeqlunga mitghughtuq \'91she promised me, but she didn\'92t make good on her promise\'92	promise to do something but not follow up on it												to go somewhere but not return as expected; to promise to do something but not follow up on it				CK A & W 54, VK		mitghugh-	mitghugh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1271 -\

\f1\b mitinga\super e\nosupersub , mitiinga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vbnb3f\super s\nosupersub . vbn73f\super s	\nosupersub meeting															meeting		from English \'91meeting\'92	SLI			mitingae; mitingae	mitingae; mitxngae	\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 , \u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1251 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
mughaya-	ve4fz-	walk through deep snow		mughayaaq \'91he walked through deep snow\'92 / 
\f2\i cf
\f0\i0 . mughu-													to walk through deep snow						mughaya-	mughaya-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1103 -\
mughayaneq	ve4fzys2	snow, deep and soft															deep soft snow		< mughaya-neq\super 2				\nosupersub mughayaneq	mughayaneq	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1103 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
mughleg-	ve4ksu-	roll up with the ends inside		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E); 
\f0\i0  mughlegtuq \'91it rolled up; it hid by rolling up\'92 / mughlegtaa \'91he rolled it up tucking the ends inside\'92	hide by rolling up								check				to roll up with the ends inside; to hide by rolling up	cdthnsdfnmcz rjywfvb dyenhm. cdthnsdfnm d nhe,re xnj-kb,j. pfcexbdfnm. gjlub,fnm xnj-kb,j djdyenhm			Rub. 330; CK V & E 164	> mughlegte-	mughleg-	mughleg-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
mughneq	ve4ys2	sealskin strip folded and sewn between sole and upper part of a skin-boot			welt												sealskin strip folded and sewn between sole and upper part of a skin-boot; welt						mughneq	mughneq	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
mughniqaq*	ve4yb2f2	sealskin boot, cut high with hair side in, used in summer		cf. mughneq													high sealskin boot with hair side in, used in summer						mughniqaq*	mughniqaq*	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
mughpagagh-	ve5gfuf4-	fall down while walking		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 to fall down while walking	ghjdfkbdfncz ghb [jl],t			CK V & E 159		mughpagagh-	mughpagagh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
mughu-	ve4e-	sink into soft snow (take a step and ~)		mughuuq \'91he took a step into deep snow\'92/													to take a step sinking into soft snow		PE mu39u!-				mughu-	mughu-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 -\
mughugte-	ve4e[ns-	take (it) away (as under the ice (of the water current))		unangkani mughugsimanii peskuwaghulluni \'91he said that the current took his catch away under the ice\'92; kanaghluninguq mughugtevziimakanga \'91he stepped on slush ice and he almost got sucked under the ice by the current\'92; Kitum gguutnga 
\f2\i mughugaghtekuvgu
\f0\i0  elpeklu gguten 
\f2\i mughugaghsaghqaaguq
\f0\i0 . \'91If you 
\f2\i take away
\f0\i0  someone\'92s tooth, your tooth too will be 
\f2\i taken away
\f0\i0 . (\'93a tooth for a tooth\'94)\'92 (Matthew 5:38)													to take (it) away (as under the ice (of the water current))				CK A & W 54		mughugte-	mughugte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Mughugyik	Ve4euqbr	Booshu Camp on Moghoweyik R. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Moghoweyik R. on St. Lawrence Is.												Booshu Camp on  Moghoweyik R.  on St. Lawrence Is.		< mughugte-?				Mughugyik	Mughugyik	\uc0\u1052 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1075 \u1253 \u1080 \u1082 \
mughunniigh-	ve4ey]74-	go hunting on the sea ice		mughunniightuq \'91he went hunting on the sea ice\'92 													to go hunting on the sea ice		< mughute-niigh-				mughunnigh-	mughunnxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
mughunniighta	ve4ey]75nf	hunter on the sea ice															hunter on the sea ice		< mughunniigh-(s)ta				mughunnighta	mughunnxghta	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
mughunniiq	ve4ey]72	hunting on the sea ice (season or activity of ~)															season or activity of hunting by traveling over the sea on		< mughute-niigh-				mughunniq	mughunnxq	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1179 \
mughute-	ve4ens-	hunt on the sea ice		mughutuq \'91he hunted on the sea ice\'92 /													to hunt on the sea ice		< mughu-te\super 2\nosupersub -				mughute-	mughute-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
mughuya-	ve4ez-	walk through deep snow		mughuyaaq \'91he walked through deep snow\'92													to walk through deep snow		< mughu-?-		VK		mughuya-	mughuya-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1103 -\
mughuyaneq	ve4ez3s2	deep snow															deep snow		< mughuya-neq\super 2		\nosupersub VK		mughuyaneq	mughuyaneq	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1103 \u1187 \u1099 \u1179 \
mughyug-	ve4m/u-	submerge (of a seal) after poking its head out of the water		mughyugtuq \'91it submerged again\'92 /													to submerge (of a seal) after poking its head out of the water		PE mu39u!-				mughyug-	mughyug-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
mugu	veue	group of travelers in the distance			caravan seen in the distance								check exact gloss				group of travelers in the distance; caravan seen in the distance		from Chukchi muul\'920n, m!o\'920n \'91caravan\'92	14			mugu	mugu	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \
mugu-	veue-	go away into the far distance		muguuq \'91he went away in the distance\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91there is a group of travelers in the distance\'92	move from place to place	for there to be a group of travelers in the distance							check exact gloss				to go away into the far distance; to move from place to place; for there to be a group of travelers in the distance		from Chukchi muul\'920n, m!o\'920n \'91caravan\'92	14			mugu-	mugu-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 -\
mugurin	veuehby	track(s) of wandering reindeer herders		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); plural, 
\f0\i0 muguritet
\f2\i , used for the tracks													
\f0\i0 track(s) of wandering reindeer herders		< mugu-?-(u)n		CK Rub 329		mugurin	mugurin	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1088 \u1080 \u1085 \
mugutin	veuenby	gear necessary for travelling a long distance		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 gear necessary for travelling a long distance		< mugu-?-(u)n		CK Rub 329		mugutin	mugutin	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1080 \u1085 \
mulaagh-	vek94-	howl (of dogs, wolves, etc.)		mulaaghtuq \'91it howled, roared\'92 /	roar												to howl (of dogs, wolves, etc.); to roar						mulagh-	mulxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\

\f1\b mula\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub vekzs	nipple															nipple		PE mul0(!)				mulae	mulae	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
mulu-, muluugh-	vek/-. vek04-	tarry		muluuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  muluughtuq \'91he took a long time\'92 / muluughutaa \'91he kept it for a long time or worked on it for a long time\'92	long time (be gone for or take a ~)												to tarry; to be gone for or to take a long time	nhfnbn vyjuj dhtvtyb\\ pflth;bdfncz	PE mulu-		CK V & E 1138 (Russ voc)	; > mulunghituq	mulu-, mulugh-	mulu-, mulxgh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 -, \u1084 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 -\
mulunghituq	vek/y4bne2	before long		
\f2\i essentially a particle; Mulunghituq
\f0\i0  Taykegergen esnameng taglaamalghii mengteghaminun. \'91
\f2\i Before long
\f0\i0  Taykegergen came up from the shore to his house.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 20); Piniightaa 
\f2\i mulunghituq
\f0\i0 , maaveklu tagiiqluni. \'91He recovered completely 
\f2\i before long
\f0\i0 , and he would come here.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:46)	long (before ~)												before long		< mulu-nghite-
\f2\i \'a3rd person singular indicative				
\f0\i0 mulunghituq	mulunghituq	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \
mumegh-	vevs4-	go sideways		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 sideways (go ~)												to go sideways				CK Rub 331		mumegh-	mumegh-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 -\
mumeq	vevs2	drumstick (stick for beating a drum)															drumstick (stick for beating a drum)		PE mum03(-)				mumeq	mumeq	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \
mumig-	vevbu-	turned over		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0  mumigtuq \'91he turned over\'92; mumigtaa \'91he turned it over, translated it\'92; mumigngaaq \'91it is turned over\'92	translated												turned over; translated		PE mumi!-			; > mumigtelleq, mumigtisiq	mumig-	mumig-	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
mumigtelleq	vevb[nsk]s2	translation			turning over (act of ~)	turned over thing											translation; act of turning over; something turned over		< mumigte-lleq				mumigtelleq	mumigtelleq	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
mumigtisiq 	vevb[nbcb2	spatula															spatula		< mumigte-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				mumigtisiq 	mumigtisiq 	\uc0\u1084 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
muuga	v8uf	sweets		
\f2\i Muugameng
\f0\i0  neghlunga gguusiqunga. \'91I ate some 
\f2\i sweets
\f0\i0  and had a toothache.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 53)	sweetness												sweetness; sweets		PE 0mmu!				muga	mxga	\uc0\u1084 \u1263 \u1075 \u1072 \
muugaghte-	v8uf5ns-	sweet (become ~)		muugaghtuq \'91it got sweet\'92													to become sweet		< muuga-ghte-				mugaghte-	mxgaghte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1263 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
muugate-	v8ufns-	sweet (be ~)		muugatuq \'91it is sweet\'92 / muugalnguq \'91sweet thing\'92													to be sweet	ckfljcnm	< muuga-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -		CK V & E 132, (Russ voc)		mugate-	mxgate-	\uc0\u1084 \u1263 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
muughpag-	v15gfu-	flee under water (of sea mammal)		maklak saamteggun muughpagtuq \'91the bearded seal fled under us\'92; muughpaglleghhii naghullegluku akuuraamaa \'91it was fleeing, and he harpooned it and caught it\'92													to flee under water (of sea mammal)				CK A & W 		mughpag-	mxghpag-	\uc0\u1084 \u1265 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
muughpagte-	v85gf[ns-	escape under the surface of the ocean (of sea mammal)															to escape under the surface of the ocean (of sea mammal)				VK		mughpagte-	mxghpagte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1263 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
muutaq	v8nf2	material that someone has asked to have work done on															material that someone has asked to have work done on		< muute-aq				mutaq	mxtaq	\uc0\u1084 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
muute-	v8ns-	ask someone to do something about (it)		muutaa \'91he asked someone to do something about it\'92 / yugem atkuk muutaa kakisqelluku aghnamun \'91the man asked the woman to sew up the parka\'92													to ask someone to do something about (it)		PE 0m0t			; > muutaq, muutighvike-	mute-	mxte-	\uc0\u1084 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
muutighvike-	v8nb4dbrs-	ask (him) to do something		muutighvikaa \'91he asked her to do something\'92; = muutighvike-													to ask (him) to do something		< muute-?-vike-				mutighvike-	mxtighvike-	\uc0\u1084 \u1263 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
muutivike-	v8nbdbrs-	ask (him) to do something		muutivikaa \'91he asked her to do something\'92 / yugem aghnaq muutivikaa ayapghaatanglliisqelluni \'91the man asked the woman to make him mittens\'92; = muutighvike-													to ask (him) to do something		< muute-?-vike-				mutivike-	mxtivike-	\uc0\u1084 \u1263 \u1090 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
na	yf	no		
\f2\i (particle);
\f0\i0  = nakaa													no						na	na	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \
na-	yf-	where (be where?)		
\f2\i used only with transitive (impersonal subject) interrogative endings:
\f0\i0  naagu? \'91where is it?, where is he?\'92; naaki? \'91where are they?\'92; naakek? \'91where are they\sub 2\nosupersub ?\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nani, naten													to be where?						na-	na-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 -\
naa	y6	mother		naaka \'91my mother\'92; naanga \'91his mother\'92; Maaten ilangani aghnaghaam 
\f2\i naani
\f0\i0  pimakanga, "Ataka, iiwen anengaanka ivaghyaghtughnayaqenka." 
\f2\i Naangan
\f0\i0  pimakanga, "Iwerngaqun iflallequten." \'91One time the girl said to her 
\f2\i mother
\f0\i0 , \'93I\'92ll go search for my father and my brothers.\'94 Her 
\f2\i mother
\f0\i0  said to her, \'93But you\'92ll get lost.\'94 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 13); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 anaana, enaangaay													mother		PE a(a)na			; > naakaghqaq, naaknaaq, naangilnguq; 	na	nx	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \
naa-	y6-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0  > naama-, naamakaghte-, naamake-, naate-																			na-	nx-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 -\
naafqe-	y6a2s-	break (cause to ~)		naafquq \'91he made a break for it\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91it (the weather) got bad\'92; naafqaa \'91he broke it\'92 / naafqiiq \'91he broke something\'92; tangyeghmigegka ifkaghlukek naafqagka \'91dropping my wristwatch I broke it\'92	run	weather gets bad								bad (weather gets ~)			to break; to cause to break; to run make a break for it; for weather to become bad		< naave-?-			; > naafqemmi, naafqii-	nafqe-	nxfqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1092 \u1179 \u1099 -\
naafqemmi	y6a2sv]b	bad weather (at the time of ~)		
\f2\i essentially a particle													
\f0\i0 at the time of bad weather		< naafqe-
\f2\i localis				
\f0\i0 nafqemmi	nxfqemmi	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1092 \u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \
naafqii-	y6a27-	disturbance (cause a ~)		naafqiiguq \'91he caused a disturbance\'92													to cause a disturbance		< naafqe-?-li-				nafqi-	nxfqx-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1092 \u1179 \u1251 -\
naafte-	y6ans-	stormy (get ~)		naaftuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  naaftaa \'91it is getting stormy\'92	blizzard arises												to get stormy; for a blizzard to arise		cf. PE navcu; < naave-te\super 1\nosupersub -				nafte-	nxfte-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naaggute-	y6[ens-	trip over something															to trip over something		< naagte-(u)te-				naggute-	nxggute-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naagh-	y64-	smell		naaghtuq (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  naaghutuq) \'91he smelled something\'92; naaghaa \'91he smelled it, kissed her\'92 / naaghutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  kissed\'92	kiss	sniff											to smell; to sniff; to kiss		PE na30-			; > naaghte-, naaghwaagh-; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  naaghsaq	nagh-	nxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1271 -\
naaghsagh-	y65cz4-	ignite; light (ignite)		naaghsaghaa \'91he lit it\'92 /													to ignite; to light		PY-S na$a3caq				naghsagh-	nxghsagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
naaghsaq	y65cz2	match (for lighting fire)															match (for lighing fire)		PY-S na$a3caq				naghsaq	nxghsaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
naaghte-	y65ns-	anesthetize with ether or the like															to anesthetize with ether or the like		< naagh-te\super 1\nosupersub -				naghte-	nxghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naaghwaagh-	y64164-	sniff		naaghwaaghtuq \'91he sniffed\'92; naaghwaaghaa \'91he sniffed it\'92 / Mesiighpagni meghnuutaqa 
\f2\i naaghwaaneghmeng
\f0\i0 . \'91I am tired of 
\f2\i smelling
\f0\i0  the odor of oil.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 109)	smell an odor for a while												to sniff; to smell an odor for a while		< naagh-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-				naghwagh-	nxghwxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
naagsagh-	y6[cz4-	target shoot		naagsaghtuq \'91he is target shooting\'92; naagsaghaa \'91he's target shooting with it (the gun)\'92 / naagsaghvikaa \'91he's target shooting at it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nakegh-	shoot (target ~)												to target shoot						nagsagh-	nxgsagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
naagsaq	y6[cz2	target															target						nagsaq	nxgsaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
naagte-	y6[ns-	stumble		naagtuq \'91he tripped\'92 / uyghagkun naagtuq \'91he tripped on a rock\'92; = aagte\super 2\nosupersub -; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nakligh-	trip (stumble)												to stumble; to trip		PE na!0t-				nagte-	nxgte-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naagu	y6ue	where is it/he/she?		naagu suflugaqa? \'91where is my gun?\'92; Kayngeghllagem pimakanga, "Quyngiq qerngughsaghtughnaqaqa." Taagken aviilluni, aviiteghllagluni iitghumalghii. Aapsimakanga nanevgam, "Qayugham 
\f2\i naagu
\f0\i0 ?" \'91The bear said to him, "I am about to go gather the reindeer." After being away for a long time, he came back inside. The old man asked him, "So then, 
\f2\i where is it (are they)
\f0\i0 ?"\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. III:15); Egllullgaaftuqlu taawa 
\f2\i naagu
\f0\i0  suflugmeng ivaghnaghhaq. Tamaa
\f2\i  copper
\f0\i0 -et, legan taakwavek suqlughlluki, wayameng sameng, wayaghtuftuqlu copper-meng tamaa. Sufluget taaqiit. \'91Evidentally it had a stove, and 
\f2\i somewhere
\f0\i0  a stovepipe was to be sought. They bent copper (sheets) and wired (that is, wrapped) it with copper wire. They finished the stovepipe.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)	somewhere												where is it?; where is he/she?; somewhere		< na-
\f2\i transitive \'a3s-\'a3s interrogative				
\f0\i0 nagu	nxgu	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1075 \u1091 \
naakaghqaq	y6rf52f2	stepmother			adoptive mother	foster-mother								mother (step, foster or adoptive)			step, foster or adoptive mother		< naa-kaghqaq				nakaghqaq	nxkaghqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
naakghite-	y6r4bns-	poor shot (be a ~)															to be a poor shot		< nakegh-(ng)ite-				nakghite-	nxkghite-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1082 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naaknaaq	y6ry]62	aunt, in the sense of one's uncle's wife			mother, bad	stepmother through father's remarriage											aunt, in the sense of one's uncle's wife; bad mother; stepmother through father's remarriage		< naa-?-				naknaq	nxknxq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u257 \u1179 \
naalkaq	y6k]rf4	seat of pants		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 naalkak
\f2\i , for the seat of one pair of pants													
\f0\i0 seat of pants		PE na@0kk0!				nalkaq	nxlkaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \
naalke-	y6k]rs-	find		naalkaa \'91he found it\'92 / naalkutuq \'91he found something\'92; naalkefikaa \'91he found something of his on her (she had stolen it)\'92; Iyegaategka iflakagka estugaghmeng 
\f2\i naalkagka
\f0\i0 . \'91I 
\f2\i found
\f0\i0  my eyeglasses that I\'92d lost at the store.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 104)													to find		PY-S nalk0- (under PE na@0-)				nalke-	nxlke-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1099 -\
naalkutaaq	y6k]ren62	found thing															found thing		< naalkute-?				nalkutaq	nxlkutxq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
naalkute-	y6k]rens-	find something		naalkutuq \'91he found something\'92 /													to find something		< naalke-(u)te-				nalkute-	nxlkute-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Naalla	Y9k]z	Gambell (north beach of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 north beach of Gambell						Nalla	Nxlla	\uc0\u1053 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
naallghute-	y6k]5ens-	fix or get fixed		naallghutuq \'91it\'92s gotten fixed\'92; naallghutaa \'91he fixed it, adjusted it\'92 /	repair	correct								align or adjust			to fix or get fixed; to repair; to correct; to align or adjust		PE na@3ut0- (under PE na@0-); < nalla-?-(u)te-				nallghute-	nxllghute-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naama-	y6vf-	sufficient (be ~)		naamaaq \'91it is sufficient\'92 / qiipaghaghqaq naamaaq \'91there is enough parka material\'92	enough (be ~)												to be sufficient; to be enough	ljcnfnjxyj	PE na9ama- (under PE na9a-); < naa-(i/u)ma-		CK V & E 138		nama-	nxma-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1084 \u1072 -\
naamakaghte-	y6vfrf5ns-	get enough		
\f2\i Naamakaghtaqa
\f0\i0  kaviiq angyangnatkaghqastun. \'91I 
\f2\i got
\f0\i0  
\f2\i enough
\f0\i0  fox (pelts) to buy a boat.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 104)	enough (get ~)												to get enough		< naama-?-				namakaghte-	nxmakaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naamake-	y6vfrs-	fit into		naamakaa \'91he fits into it\'92/ atkuka naamakaqa \'91my parka fits me\'92 (
\f2\i literally:
\f0\i0  \'91I fit into my parka\'92)													to fit into		< naama-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				namake-	nxmake-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
naamigte-	y6vb[ns-	go as far as		naamigtaa \'91he completed it\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he went as far as it\'92 /\'85 piyaaluteng tuvaq 
\f2\i naamiglluku
\f0\i0 , uteghmun qiivyalghiimeng, uyughaat aviituq. \'91\'85 walking along they 
\f2\i got to
\f0\i0  the shorefast ice, and when they went back home their brother was gone.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:12)	complete												to go as far as; to complete						namigte-	nxmigte-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1084 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naange-	y63s-	end (come to an ~)		naanguq \'91it is all gone\'92 or \'91(it is) the end\'92 / naangtaa \'91he used it up\'92; naangutuq kufimeng \'91he is out of coffee\'92; naangyaghaq \'91the ending\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 naangquq	gone (be all ~)	used up (be ~)								finished or comsumed (be ~)			to come to an end; to be all gone; to be consumed; to be finished; be used up		< nange-				nange-	nxnge-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u1099 -\
naangelleq	y63sk]s2	residue															residue		< naange-lleq\super 1				\nosupersub nangelleq	nxngelleq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
naanghaq	y6y4f2	fat (especially of cow walrus)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  naangghaq	blubber (cow walrus ~)												fat (especially cow walrus); cow walrus blubber						nanghaq	nxnghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
naangilnguq	y63bk3e2	motherless child			child, motherless												motherless child		< naa-(ng)ite-nguq				nangilnguq	nxngilnguq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
naangneq	y63ys2	leftover		naangnengunani \'91endlessly\'92	end								check second gloss (from Rub.) -- it looks okay to me				leftover; end		< naange-neq\super 2				\nosupersub nangneq	nxngneq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
naangngwaaghaan	y63]1646y	swing for playing		
\f2\i used in the dual
\f0\i0 , naangngwaaghhaatek,
\f2\i  for one swing													
\f0\i0 swing for playing		< naangngaaghagh-(u)n				nangngwaghan	nxngngwxghxn	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u1100 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u257 \u1085 \
naangngwaaghagh-	y63]164f4-	swing at play		naangngwaaghaghtuq \'91he was swinging\'92; naangngwaaghaghtaa \'91he is swinging it\'92													to swing at play		PE 0na-			> naangngwaaghaatek	nangngwaghagh-	nxngngwxghagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u1100 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
naangqiqe-	y632b2s-	work on ivory		naangqiquq \'91he worked on ivory\'92 /	ivory (work on ~)												to work on ivory		< naangquq-?-				nangqiqe-	nxngqiqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
naangqughtaq	y632e5nf2	ivory piece on keel of boat															ivory piece on keel of boat		< naangquq-taq\super 1				\nosupersub nangqughtaq	nxngqughtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
naangquq	y632e2	piece of ivory (hard part)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  naange-; Uunghat neghighluku 
\f2\i naangqumeng
\f0\i0  tuugqelghiit. \'91Harpoons of times past had 
\f2\i ivory
\f0\i0  points.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 105)	ivory piece (hard part)	tusk (hard part)											piece of ivory (hard part); tusk (hard part)		PE na&qu3			> naangqiqe-, naangqughtaq	nangquq	nxngquq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
naanneghite-	y6y]s4bns-	nowhere else (be ~, but ... (in a certain place))											looks okay, but check for examples, also the question of whether this should be a separate entry or an example, or what				to be nowhere else, but ... (in a certain place)	yf[jlbnmcz yt ult-yb,elm. f > > >	< naante-nghite-		Rub. 357		nanneghite-	nxnneghite-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naanqaghqe-	y6y2f52s-	pay off a debt		asengemi nuughtellgha naanqaghqaa \'91he payed off his bills\'92; qelaneghpenang pikengegkuma naanqaghqennaaghamken \'91don\'92t get impatient, I will pay you off when I get the wherewithal\'92													to pay off a debt				CK A & W 55		nanqaghqe-	nxnqaghqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
naapniigh-	y6gy]74-	trap (go trapping)		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  naapniightuq \'91he's going trapping\'92 /	go trapping												to go trapping		< naapte-niigh-				napnigh-	nxpnxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1087 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
naapniighta	y6gy]75nf	trapper		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 trapper		< naapniigh-(s)ta				napnighta	nxpnxghta	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1087 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
naapte-	y6gns-	catch with trap or net		naaptuq \'91he caught something; naaptaa he caught it\'92 / Negaghpagput akimigaq 
\f2\i naapsimalghii
\f0\i0  amaghtumeng. \'91Our net 
\f2\i caught
\f0\i0  fifteen humpback salmon.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 105); 
\f2\i Naapta
\f0\i0  kaviiq esghaghaqa taawa unkusegpegun. \'91I saw a fox 
\f2\i getting caught
\f0\i0  there in your trap.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 105)													to catch with trap or net		PE nap03- and nap0t-				napte-	nxpte-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1087 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naaqa	y62f	small surf wave		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 small surf wave	vfktymrfz ghb,jqyfz djkyf			CK V & E 41		naqa	nxqa	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1179 \u1072 \
naaqaa-	y626-	smell (have a ~)		Amik qelpeghngamaluku imaninguq sangwaa 
\f2\i naaqaaluni
\f0\i0  neqniipiglleghhii aana. \'91The door being  open something there coming out, very delicous, 
\f2\i had an aroma
\f0\i0  .\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 2)	emit an aroma												to smell (have a smell); emit an aroma		< naagh-?-				naqa-	nxqx-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1179 \u257 -\
naarqaq	y6i2f2	scalp of animal including skin from face															scalp of animal including skin from face						narqaq	nxrqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1096 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
naasaghagh-	y6cz4f4-	estimate			predict	measure											to estimate; to predict; to measure				VK\'92s dict. revs.		nasaghagh-	nxsaghagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
naasaghaq	y6cf4f2	marker indicating something		siqineq naasaghaakun piituq \'91the sun rose in the direction indicated by his marker\'92; angyat naayghaq naasaghaqluku taglaghtut \'91the boat went home using the mountain as a marker\'92													marker indicating something				CK A & W 55		nasaghaq	nxsaghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
naasiigh-	y6c74-	taste		naasiightuq \'91he tasted something\'92; naasiighaa \'91he tasted it\'92 / naasiiqaghhu taana ugkem qayaa \'91taste that meat broth please\'92; naasiighutuq \'91he tasted or experienced it\'92; naasiighutuq kayum qayaaneng eslami gaaqameng \'91he tasted some broth from sculpin that had been boiled outdoors\'92; naasiighutuq tawatelngughmeng teghigniqelleghmeng alikegpenakek angayuqagni talwa \'91he  experienced that kind of enjoyment without fearing his parents' reaction\'92	experience												to taste; to experience					; > naasiighute-	nasigh-	nxsxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
naasqiqe-	y6c2b2s-	headache (have a ~)		naasqiquq \'91he had or has a headache\'92 / naasqiqsagutuq \'91he started having a headache\'92; naasqiqnaghtuq \'91it causes headaches\'92													to have a headache		< naasquq-liqe-				nasqiqe-	nxsqiqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
naasqughiitaq	y6c2e47nf2	headband		= nasqughiitaq\super 1													\nosupersub headband		< naasquq-(ng)iitaq				nasqughitaq	nxsqughxtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
naasqughlluk	y6c2e5k]/r	aged (for eating) fish head			fish head, aged for eating												aged (for eating) fish head		< naasquq-lluk				nasqughlluk	nxsqughlluk	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
naasquq	y6c2e2	head		naasqwa \'91his head\'92; Aawyaghllak, 
\f2\i naasqughllaga
\f0\i0  uuknaghllaga kiiluugteghllakaq. \'91He had a blood clot; this side of his entire 
\f2\i head
\f0\i0  was all covered with cuts.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:40)	leader												head; leader		PE nay(0)qu3-			; > naasqughiitaq, naasquvrak, naasqiqe-	nasquq	nxsquq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
naasquvrak	y6c2edhfr	bowl		
\f2\i Naasquvrak
\f0\i0  mesiighmeng imighaqa. \'91I filled the 
\f2\i bowl
\f0\i0  with seal oil.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 106)	container, rounded												bowl; rounded container		< naasquq-?-				nasquvrak	nxsquvrak	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
naate-	y6ns-	complete (be ~, or, bring up to full number)		naatuq \'91it is complete\'92; naataa \'91he completed it\'92 / qiipaghaghqaq naatuq \'91the parka material is complete, there is now sufficient parka material\'92; naatuqun \'91an addition which completes something\'92; asengeni naataa \'91he paid her debt in full\'92	sufficient (be ~)												to complete (bring up to full number); to be complete; to be sufficient		PE na9at- (under PE na9a-); < naa-(u)te-				nate-	nxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naatghigh-	y6n5b4-	sole wears out (have one\'92s boot sole wear out)		naatghightuq \'91his sole wore out\'92 /	wear out (have one\'92s boot sole wear out)												for one's boot sole to wear out		< nateq-(ng)igh-				natghigh-	nxtghigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1090 \u1203 \u1080 \u1271 -\
naave-	y6ds-	break		naavuq \'91it broke\'92 / naavngaaq \'91it is broken\'92;													to break		PE nav0!-			 > naavellget, naafqe-, naafte-	nave-	nxve-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1074 \u1099 -\
naavelleq	y6dsk]s2	ruin(s)		
\f2\i used in the plural
\f0\i0 , naavellghet, 
\f2\i used for one ruin	
\f0\i0 piece(s), broken												ruin(s); broken piece(s)		< naave-lleq				navelleq	nxvelleq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
naavghusaq	y6d4ecz2	item given in exchange for something															item given in exchange for something		< navegh-(u)saq		VK\'92s dict. revs.		navghusaq	nxvghusaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1074 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
naavghute-	y6d4ens-	exchange		naavghutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  traded places\'92; naavghutaa \'91he exchanged it\'92 / naavghutaa angyani suflugalegnun \'91he exchanged his boat for guns\'92	change places	trade places											to exchange; to change or trade places		< navegh-(u)te-				navghute-	nxvghute-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1074 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naavyigh-	y6dqb4-	tired (become very ~)		Enkaangam qamumun iknaqut 
\f2\i naavyighyaghqaanghisimaghmeng
\f0\i0  ayuqut. \'91And so they were strong for hauling and they would not 
\f2\i become tired out
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:78)													to become very tired						navyigh-	nxvyigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1074 \u1253 \u1080 \u1271 -\
naawaagh-	y6164-	search around for something that\'92s not visible		kalngagem asinganilnguut ghhuughet  kataguutkat kaguluki naaawaaghluki tugulaghii \'91he reached into the pile of bullets that were spilled under the hunting bag and gathered what he needed\'92; neghsaq kalevegkaq uunghameng naawaaghluku akuuraamakangat! \'91their seal sank so they tried harpooning it (not quite knowing where the seal is), and they caught onto it!\'92													to search around for something that\'92s not visible				CK A & W 55		nawagh-	nxwxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
naayghaleketaaq	y6q4fksrsn62	hill, small, with large rocks		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 small hill with large rocks		< naayghaq-?-ketaaq		CK Rub 347		nayghaleketaq	nxyghaleketxq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
naayghaq	y6q4f2	mountain															mountain		from Chukchi &e!n0 \'91mountain\'92	14		naayghiinaq	nayghaq	nxyghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
Naayghaq	Y6q4f2	Gambell Mountain		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Sevoukuk Mountain												Gambell or \'93Sevoukuk\'94 Mountain		< naayghaq	14			Nayghaq	Nxyghaq	\uc0\u1053 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
naayghiinaq	y6q47yf2	northwest															northwest		< naayghaq-inaq		SLI cur. man. 19		nayghinaq	nxyghxnaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
naayvagh-	y6qdf4-	freeze (of lakes)															to freeze (of lakes)		PE nanva3				nayvagh-	nxyvagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Naayvaghllak	Y6df5k]zr	Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91large lake\'92; 
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		< naayvaq-ghllak				Nayvaghllak	Nxyvaghllak	\uc0\u1053 \u257 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
Naayvaghpak	Y6qdf5gfr	Niyrakpak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Niyrakpak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		< naayvaq-ghpak				Nayvaghpak	Nxyvaghpak	\uc0\u1053 \u257 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
Naayvaghvik	Y6qdf4dbr	October		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  'time of freezing of lakes'; 
\f2\i also given in one source as 
\f0\i0 September													October		< naayvagh-vik				Nayvaghvik	Nxyvaghvik	\uc0\u1053 \u257 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
Naayvam kangii	Y6qdfv rf37	Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. (site at western end of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site at western end of  Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		< Naayvaq-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + kangiq-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxk	Nayvam Kangi	Nxyvam Kangx	\uc0\u1053 \u257 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1084  \u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1251 \
naayvaq	y6qdf2	lake															lake		< nayvagh-			naayviinaq	nayvaq	nxyvaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b Naayvaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Y6qdf2\super \'a1	\nosupersub Nayvak Lake just west of Old Chaplino (Ungaziq) in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Old Chaplino (Ungaziq) in Chukotka [Nayvak Lake just west of ~]												Nayvak Lake just west of Old Chaplino (Ungaziq) in Chukotka		< naayvaq				Nayvaq1	Nxyvaq1	\uc0\u1053 \u257 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b Naayvaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Y6qdf2\super \'99	\nosupersub Troutman Lake next to Gambell		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Troutman Lake next to Gambell		< naayvaq				Nayvaq2	Nxyvaq2	\uc0\u1053 \u257 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 2\
naayviinaq	y6qd7yf2	south-southeast		
\f2\i questioned													
\f0\i0 south-southeast		< naayvaq-(ng)inaq				nayvinaq	nxyvxnaq	\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1253 \u1074 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
nae	yfs	home		neka \'91my home\'92; nenga \'91his home\'92; nenka \'91my household\'92; 
\f2\i Nek 
\f0\i0 unaaq kaasimaak tengegkayugkun. \'91The 
\f2\i couple
\f0\i0  came by plane.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 118); 
\f2\i Net
\f0\i0  tukuunka tallimaneng avaqutaqeftut. \'91The 
\f2\i household
\f0\i0  I stayed with had five children.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 162)	place	household or couple								room of house			home; place; household; room of house; couple		PE 0n0			; > nekeg-, nekeggmelleq, nekwaagh-, nelegte-, neli-, nelliqe-, nellugyug-, nengiighhaq, nengllugutet, nengughte-	na	na	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1099 \
naflughqugh-	yfak]/52e4-	cut at joint		naflughqughtuq \'91he made a cut at a joint\'92; naflughqughaa \'91he cut it at a joint\'92 / 	disassemble at joint												to cut or disassemble at joint		< nafluq-?-				naflughqugh-	naflughqugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nafluq	yfak]/2	joint		= naplu	hinge	crack in ice											joint; hinge; crack in ice	otkm dj kmle	PE naplu		CK V & E 25	> naflughqugh-	nafluq	nafluq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \
nafqesghagh-	yfa2sc4f4-	falsely accuse through gossip		nafqesghaasimaat teglengaghniluku \'91they falsely said that he was a thief\'92; nafqesghaasimakangat pinghiteghngaan \'91they said that he did it, even though he didn\'92t do it\'92	accuse falsely through gossip												to falsely accuse through gossip				CK A & W 55		nafqesghagh-	nafqesghagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1092 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nafteghte-	yfans5ns-	attach		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf. 
\f0\i0 neve-	list	insert							check this; I know nothing like it in CSY, CAY or NSY -- but there is neve- \'91to cling\'92	glue			to attach; to list; to insert; to glue	ghbdzpsdfnm. ghbrhtgkznm xnj-k> r xtve-k>. ghbwtgkznm xnj-k>. dgbcsdfnm rjuj-xnj-k>. dcnfdkznm xnj-k>			Rub. 367		nafteghte-	nafteghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nafugh-	yfae4-	hurt for someone		nafughtuq \'91he hurt for someone\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he died of sadness, died of a broken heart\'92 / nafughnaghtuq \'91he/it is such as to make die die of a broken heart\'92; Kii aghnaghaghmi whanii, 
\f2\i nafughnaghquten
\f0\i0  elngaatall, aqfaaqamken. \'91Listen girl, I 
\f2\i cannot stand your suffering
\f0\i0  any longer; I\'92ve come to get you.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:248)	die of sadness (missing someone)	broken heart (die of a ~)											to hurt for someone; to die of sadness (missing someone); to die of a broken heart						nafugh-	nafugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1092 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nafuqe-	yfae2s-	feel broken-hearted over (him/it)		nafuqaa \'91he feels broken-hearted over him, or it\'92 /													to feel broken-hearted over (him/it)		< nafugh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				nafuqe-	nafuqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1092 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nagaqugh-	yfuf2e4-	hear		nagaqughtuq \'91he heard something\'92; nagaqughaa \'91he heard her\'92 /	understand												to hear; to understand		< nagate-qugh-				nagaqugh-	nagaqugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nagasugni-	yfufc/uyb-	eavesdrop		nagasugniiq \'91he eavesdropped\'92; nagasugnii \'91he eavesdropped on her\'92 /	watch for												to eavesdrop; to watch for		< nagate-yug-neq\super 2\nosupersub -li-				nagasugni-	nagasugni-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 -\
nagate-	yfufns-	listen		nagatuq \'91he is listened\'92; nagataa \'91he listened to her\'92 /													to listen		PE na!a(t0)-			 > nagaqugh-, nagasugni-, nagatusiq	nagate-	nagate-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nagatusiq	yfufnecb2	earphone			stethoscope												earphone; stethoscope		< nagate-(u)siq				nagatusiq	nagatusiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
naghaagh-	yf464-	play		naghaaghtuq \'91he played\'92 / naghaaghutut \'91they played together\'92													to play					; > naghaaghun, naghaalgun	naghagh-	naghxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 -\
naghaaghun	yf464ey	toy			plaything												toy; plaything		< naghaagh-(u)n			; > naghaaghutraaq	naghaghun	naghxghun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
naghaaghutraaq	yf464eni62	cartoon															cartoon		< nagaaghun-raaq				naghaghutraq	naghxghutrxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1096 \u257 \u1179 \
naghaalgun	yf46kuey	playmate		naghaalgutka \'91my playmate\'92													playmate		< naghaagh-lgun				naghalgun	naghxlgun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
naghigh-	yf4b4-	slack (become ~ (of rope or the like, or wind)		naghightuq \'91it went slack\'92 / naghightaa \'91he made it slack, loosened it\'92	loose (become ~)	die down (of wind)											to become slack (of rope or the like, or wind); to become loose; to die down (of wind)		PY-S na3i3-				naghigh-	naghigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
naghllug-	yf5k]/u-	head downwards		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); postural root; 
\f0\i0 naghllugmi \'91(it being) with head downwards\'92									check				head downwards	dybp ujkjdjq			Rub. 368		naghllug-	naghllug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
naghpaghsigh-	yf5gf5cb4-	shamanistic activity (engage in ~ in order to improve the weather)															to engage in shamanistic activity in order to improve the weather						naghpaghsigh-	naghpaghsigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
naghpigh-	yf5gb4-	lasso		naghpighaa \'91he lassoed it\'92 /													to lasso					 > naghpiin	naghpigh-	naghpigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1080 \u1271 -\
naghpiin	yf5g7y	lasso															lasso		< naghpigh-(u)n				naghpin	naghpxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \
naghpiitelek	yf5gbnsksr	bearded seal with bright band over the \'93shoulder\'94 area		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	Erignathus barbatus 
\f0\i0 (bearded seal)  with bright band over the \'93shoulder\'94 area												bearded seal 
\f2\i (Erignathus barbatus)
\f0\i0 with bright band over the \'93shoulder\'94 area				CK Rub 369		naghpitelek	naghpxtelek	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
naghquq	yf52e2	rheumatism		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf. 
\f0\i0 naghqwaaq									check; what is it related to? -- naghqwaaq a variant of neghqwaaq \'91bone\'92, probably				rheumatism	htdvfnbpv			Rub. 368		naghquq	naghquq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
naghqutkaq	yf52enrf2	feed (for dogs or other animals)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  = neghqutkaq									check				feed (for dogs or other animals)	ghtlyfpyfxtyysq lkz rjhvf			Rub. 368		naghqutkaq	naghqutkaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
naghqwaaq	yf52162	bone		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  = neghqwaaq	framing member (as of house)												bone; framing member (as of house)				CK Rub 368		naghqwaq	naghqwxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
naghrigte-	yf4hb[ns-	swipe one\'92s wetted finger under another\'92s nose as a gesture of scorn		ayumiq ilateng ugumiyagunneghmegteki naghrigtaqiit \'91in the old days, when people were annoyed at other people, they\'92d wet their fingers and swipe it under the other\'92s noses\'92													to swipe one\'92s wetted finger under another\'92s nose as a gesture of scorn		PE na3ci!-		CK A & W 56		naghrigte-	naghrigte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naghsaq	yf5cz2	seal		= neghsaq													seal				in Rubtsova story Arepaki ama Qalu; also from Chris.		naghsaq	naghsaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
naghughaghte-	yf4e4f5ns-	pass by quickly															to pass by quickly		< naghugh-aghte-				naghughaghte-	naghughaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naghughte-	yf4e5ns-	pass by		naghughtuq \'91he passed by\'92; naghughtaa \'91he passed by it or her\'92 / naghughtekan \'91when he passes by\'92; naghughutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  passed each other\'92; Pingayut aghveghet ketemteggun 
\f2\i naghughtut
\f0\i0 . \'91Three whales 
\f2\i passed by
\f0\i0  farther down in front of us.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 108)													to pass by		PE na39u!-				naghughte-	naghughte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naghulleg-	yf4ek]su-	harpoon		naghullegtuq \'91he harpooned something\'92; naghullgaa \'91he harpooned it\'92 /													to harpoon		PE na3u@03-			> naghullgun, naghullgute-	naghulleg-	naghulleg-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 -\
naghullgun	yf4ek][ey	harpoon; harpoon rope															harpoon; harpoon rope		< naghulleg-(u)n				naghullgun	naghullgun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1091 \u1085 \
naghullgute-	yf4ek][ens-	dive into water		Mekelghiiq uyghagmeng meghmun 
\f2\i naghullgulluni
\f0\i0  pugimuq. \'91The boy 
\f2\i jumped
\f0\i0  from the rock into the water and swam.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 109)	jump in	plunge ahead								jump in			to dive into water; to plunge ahead; jump in		< naghulleg-(u)te-				naghullgute-	naghullgute-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naghuseghaq	yf4ecs4f2	hunting equipment		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 hunting equipment				CK Rub 345		naghuseghaq	naghuseghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
naghuya	yf4ez	gull			
\f2\i Larus sp.	
\f0\i0 seagull											gull; seagull
\f2\i  (Larus sp.)		
\f0\i0 PE na3uya3			> naghuyaaghaq, naghuyapik	naghuya	naghuya	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1103 \
naghuyaaghaq*	yf4e94f2	baby gull			gull, baby												baby gull		< naghuya-aghaq				naghuyaghaq*	naghuyxghaq*	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
naghuyapik	yf4ezgbr	glaucous gull			gull (glaucous ~)	
\f2\i Larus hyperboreus											
\f0\i0 glaucous gull (Larus hyperboreus)		< naghuya-pik				naghuyapik	naghuyapik	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1103 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
nagnaaqun	yfuy62ey	fur trim around hem of parka		nagnaaqusighaa \'91she put trim on it\'92													fur trim around hem of parka		< nagnegh-?-(u)n				nagnaqun	nagnxqun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
nagnegh-	yfuys4-	go on without hesitating		nagneghtuq \'91he went right on ahead\'92 / nagneghutaa \'91he took it right on ahead\'92	move on despite obstacles												to go on without hesitating; to move on despite obstacles					> nagneqagh-, nagneqe-	nagnegh-	nagnegh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 -\
nagneqagh-	yfuys2f4-	go too far and be unable to stop in time															to go too far and be unable to stop in time		< nagnegh-?-				nagneqagh-	nagneqagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nagneqe-	yfuys2s-	do more or go further than planned															to do more or go further than planned		< nagnegh-?-				nagneqe-	nagneqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nagsalghaq	yf[czk4f2	obstacle		tumet keluliit maliglleghhiini nagsalghaghhiitut \'91when going on the trail that\'92s further inland, there are no obstacles (such as mud, rivers, etc.)\'92; nagsalghangunaan mamlegmi igleghtuq \'91he traveled at night where there were no obstacles\'92													obstacle				CK A & W 56		nagsalghaq	nagsalghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nagtuqaghte-	yf[ne2f5ns-	button		nagtuqaghtuq \'91he buttoned himself\'92; nagtuqaghtaa \'91he buttoned it\'92 / nagtuqaghfik \'91button hole\'92													to button		< nagtuqaq-?				nagtuqaghte-	nagtuqaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nagtuqaq	yf[ne2f2	button															button		PE na!tuqa3 (under PE na!0t-)				nagtuqaq	nagtuqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
nagu-	yfue-	grow (of plant life, whiskers, tumors, etc.)		naguuq \'91it is growing\'92; nawaa \'91it is growing on it\'92 /													to grow (of plant life, whiskers, tumors, etc.)		PE na!u-			> naguyaq	nagu-	nagu-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 -\
nagun	yfuey	where (through ~)		nagun igleghnaqsin? \'91which way are you traveling?\'92; 
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  nani	which way												through where; which way						nagun	nagun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
naguqaq	yfue2f2	female that had just given birth		naguqaq qikmighput ighnimalghii \'91our dog just gave birth\'92; naguqaq salin ukughisigatughnguq \'91the woman who just gave birth hasn\'92t moved to her husband\'92s home\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nagu-													female that had just given birth				CK A  & W 56		naguqaq	naguqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
naguqun	yfue2ey	female\'92s firstborn child		ukaaghita naguqutanga mekelghiiq pivakepigtaat \'91they really adore and care for their daughter-in-law\'92s first child\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  naguqaq													female\'92s firstborn child				CK A & W 56		naguqun	naguqun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
naguqun	yfue2ey	child (first conceived ~ (term used by a woman only)															first conceived child (term used by a woman only)		< nagu-?-(u)n				naguqun	naguqun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
naguyaq	yfuez2	growth, unnatural			unnatural growth	tumor											unnatural growth; tumor		< nagu-?-				naguyaq	naguyaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1103 \u1179 \
nakaa, nakaan	yfr6. yfr6y	no		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  = na; 
\f2\i Nakaa
\f0\i0 , imatuq pilleqsinga, qepghaqaghllaguunga. \'91
\f2\i No
\f0\i0 , I don\'92t think I\'92ll go, I have lots of work to do.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 109)													no						naka, nakan	nakx, nakxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u257 , \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u257 \u1085 \
nakaghlleq	yfrf5k]s2	sea ice extending far out to a specific location		
\f2\i see item 99 on lst in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004													sea ice extending far out to a specific location						nakaghlleq	nakaghlleq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
nakaghtaq	yfrf5nf2	foreign object		nakaghtaghlluggaghmeng qiipaghiighaanga \'91she made a snowshirt for me out of a prized piece of imported material\'92	imported material												foreign object; imported material						nakaghtaq	nakaghtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nakaghya	yfrf4mz	east			east wind	northeast											east; east wind; northeast		PY naka3yaq				nakaghya	nakaghya	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \
nakaghyaaghte-	yfrf4m95ns-	wind changes direction and comes from the east		nakaghyaaghtaa \'91the wind is turning\'92 /													for the wind to change direction and come from the east		< nakaghya-?				nakaghyaghte-	nakaghyxghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nakaghyigh-	yfrf4qb4-	wind comes from the east		nakaghyightuq \'91there is an east wind\'92													for there to be an east wind		< nakaghya-ligh-				nakaghyigh-	nakaghyigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1253 \u1080 \u1271 -\
nakasugraaq	yfrfc/uh62	light bulb															light bulb		< nakasuk-raaq		CK Rub 347		nakasugraq	nakasugrxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
nakasugtaq	yfrfc/[nf2	float for net															float for net		< nakasuk-taq\super 1		\nosupersub CK Rub 347		nakasugtaq	nakasugtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nakasuk	yfrfc/r	bladder		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 naki-													bladder		PE nakacu!				nakasuk	nakasuk	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
nakasuwaaq	yfrfc/162	light bulb			float for fishnet, Japanese, glass, found on beach												light bulb; Japanese glass fishnet float found on beach		< nakasuk-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				nakasuwaq	nakasuwxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
nakegh-	yfrs4-	accurate (be an ~ shot)		nakeghtuq \'91he shoots well\'92 /
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 naagsaq	shoot well												to be an accurate shot; to shoot well		PE nak03-			 > nakeghsagh-, naakghite- 	nakegh-	nakegh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 -\
nakeghaq	yfrs4f2	stick tied at the end of a fishnet and used to anchor it in place		negaghpagem inglunga nakeghaa ayemumalghii \'91one of the fishnet\'92s end sticks has broken in half\'92; nakeghighyaqleggiinaq taawa negaghpak \'91right there is a fishnet ready for sticks to be tied on the ends\'92													stick tied at the end of a fishnet and used to anchor it in place				CK A & W 56		nakeghaq	nakeghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nakeghsaan	yfrs5c9y	target															target		< nakeghsagh-(u)n				nakeghsan	nakeghsxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \
nakeghsaasiq	yfrs5c9cb2	target															target		< nakeghsagh-(u)siq				nakeghsasiq	nakeghsxsiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
nakeghsagh-	yfrs5cz4-	target shoot		nakeghsaghtuq \'91he was target shooting\'92 /													to target shoot		< nakegh-sagh-			; > nakeghsaan	nakeghsagh-	nakeghsagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
naken	yfrsy	where (from ~)		naken pizin? \'91where did you come from?\'92; 
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  nani													from where						naken	naken	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \
naki-	yfrb-	bladder infection (have a ~)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nakasuk	infected bladder (have an ~)												to have a bladder infection		PE naki-				naki-	naki-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 -\
nakimtaa-	yfrbvn6-	lost (be ~ and run around in a panic)		nakimtaaguq \'91he's lost and panicking\'92 /													to be lost and run around in a panic		PE nakima-				nakimta-	nakimtx-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 -\
nakligh-	yfrk]b4-	trip (cause to ~ with one\'92s foot)		naklighaa \'91he tripped her\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 naagte-													to trip (him); to cause to trip with one's foot						nakligh-	nakligh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
nakmi-	yfrv]b-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > nakmiigh-, nakmike-, nakmikegkaq															PE na@mi(n03)				nakmi-	nakmi-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 -\
nakmiigh-	yfrv]74-	make a choice		nakmiightuq he made a choice /													to make a choice		< nakmi-?-				nakmigh-	nakmxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nakmike-	yfrv]brs-	choose		nakmikaa he chose it /													to choose		< nakmi-?-			; > nakmikegkaq	nakmike-	nakmike-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
nakmikegkaq	yfrv]brs[rf2	chosen one															chosen one		< nakmike-(g)kaq				nakmikegkaq	nakmikegkaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
nakmikuraagh-	yfrv]breh64-	picky (be ~)		nakmiilghii, nakmikuraaghnaqluni avangituq, pinillghaneng pinaqneghmeng \'91when she was picking out which ones to take, she was too picky, so she didn\'92t get anything just because she wanted only the good ones\'92; nakmikuraafqaafsi tugulaatek nengighqengwaaqaagut \'91don\'92t be picky, just take some, they have already been divided up\'92	choosy (be ~)												to be picky; to be choosy				CK A & W 56		nakmikuragh-	nakmikurxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
nakreg-	yfrisu-	hook as with a gaff		= nekreg-													to hook as with a gaff						nakreg-	nakreg-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1075 -\
nakrek	yfrisr	hook		= nekrek	gaff												hook; gaff		PE n0!ci!				nakrek	nakrek	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1082 \
nakugh-	yfre4-	eyes crossed		
\f2\i postural root:
\f0\i0  nakughtuq \'91he crossed his eyes\'92; nakughngaaq \'91his eyes are crossed\'92	crossed eyes												eyes crossed		PE naku(3)-				nakugh-	nakugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nakughmete-	yfre4vsns-	cross-eyed (be ~)															to be cross-eyed		< nakugh-mete-				nakughmete-	nakughmete-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nalgelpeniin	yfkusk]gsy7y	bundle, large, of skins		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  estiimangestamun qaakiit qafsinat nalgelpeniitet \'91they put on a few large bundles of skins onto the cutter\'92													large bundle of skins				CK Rub 350		nalgelpenin	nalgelpenxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1251 \u1085 \
nalighmeng	yfkb4vs3	or		
\f2\i conjunctive particle; 
\f0\i0 Ilangani tamaakut piyaat yuget, tevrat, uqlighhutaqelghiit meghhaghni 
\f2\i nalighmeng
\f0\i0  iighwilnguum kangitegkeni. \'91Some of the men are hunting by walking on the ice, looking out for seals, in the open water 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  on a cove of a large cake of ice.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:130); Maalghuguuk, 
\f2\i nalighmeng
\f0\i0  pingayut allakullghiit sivunelget maani Sivuqami ramket. \'91Two 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  three clans here in St. Lawrence Is. have different backgrounds.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:204)													or		< naliq-
\f2\i ablative-modalis		
\f0\i0 CK 		nalighmeng	nalighmeng	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \
nalighneq	yfkb4ys2	some part or the other		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 explore further; needs examples; check				some part or the other	rjnjhsq-yb,elm	< na-lighneq 
\f2\i or 
\f0\i0  naliq-neq		Rub. 350		nalighneq	nalighneq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
naliini	yfk7yb	or		
\f2\i particle; Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 either								needs examples; check				or; either	bkb. kb,j	< naliq-
\f2\i possessed localis		
\f0\i0 Rub. 350		nalini	nalxni	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1085 \u1080 \
naliq	yfkb2	which?		
\f2\i can be used either as an appositive or as a selectional base: 
\f0\i0 naliq qikmin qilugta? 
\f2\i or 
\f0\i0 naliit qikmivek qilugta? \'91which of your dogs barked?\'92; nalim qikmima qilugtaten? 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  naliita qikmima qilugtaten? \'91which of my dogs barked at you?\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  natu													which?		PE nalli3 (under PE na-\super 2\nosupersub )				naliq	naliq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
naliqegti-	yfkb2s[nb-	undecided on which to take		nunavaget ima ateghaatut guutestengngunateng naliqegtim \'91the herd of walrus dived into the water from ice before we had a chance to shoot on account of (us) being unsure which to shoot\'92; natmun pilleghqameng naliqegtilunga upuupeng pinghitunga \'91I wasn\'92t sure where to go, and so I didn\'92t go\'92	difficult time choosing (have a ~)												to be undecided on which to take; to have a difficult time choosing		< naliq-?-		CK A & W 56		naliqegti-	naliqegti-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 -\

\f1\b nalla, nalla\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub yfk]z. yfk]z\super s	\nosupersub corresponds (that which ~ in time or space)		nallangakun \'91through the time or space which corresponds to it\'92; nallangighaa \'91it is in line with it\'92													that which corresponds in time or space		PE na@0-				nalla, nallae	nalla, nallae	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 , \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1099 \

\f1\b Nalla\super e2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Yfk]zs\'99	North Beach at Gambell		Naalkun pama angyaput tamlagtut \'91our boat landed at North Beach\'92													North Beach at Gambell						Nallae2	Nallae2	\uc0\u1053 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1099 2\
nallagh-	yfk]z4-	run into		nallaghaa \'91he ran into him\'92 / Ungazighmiit angyiit 
\f2\i nallaghaput
\f0\i0  taan\'92gani. \'91We 
\f2\i ran into
\f0\i0  the boats from Chaplino out there.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 110)	meet	encounter											to run into; to meet; to encounter		< nalla-?-				nallagh-	nallagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
nallangigh-	yfk]z3b4-	pay off bills		nallangighaa \'91he paid it/him off, or back\'92Angyaghhaat 
\f2\i nallangiitut
\f0\i0  esneghagnun. \'91The little boat is 
\f2\i in line
\f0\i0  with the lagoon.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 110)	direct something (e.g. gun) at something or someone	move facing (against) something								pay back			to pay off bills; to direct something (e.g. gun) at something or someone; to move facing (against) something; to pay back		< nalla-(ng)igh-				nallangigh-	nallangigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
nallavragh-	yfk]zdhf4-	lose something		unangyaghluni nallavraghaa, qayughllagnguq nallunapigtuq \'91he caught a seal but he lost it, because it was difficult to see\'92; tumet naantulangi nallavraghluki iflangwaaghamalghii \'91he lost track of where the trail was and so he was lost\'92	forget where things are												to lose something; to forget where things are				CK A & W 56 CK		nallavragh-	nallavragh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nallegha,  nalleq	yfk]s4f. yfk]]s2	much (too ~!)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Naangan qamaken pimakanga, \'93Sangwaa qakemna miigtaghta 
\f2\i nalleq
\f0\i0 , kangsughsiin?\'94 \'91He mother from in there said to him, \'93What is that making knocking noises 
\f2\i too much
\f0\i0  out there, are you too big to fit in?\'94 (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 14); 
\f2\i Nallegha
\f0\i0  tawatenngam, qaa, qayumeng. \'91
\f2\i That\'92s too much
\f0\i0 , please, no mroe tea.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 110); Ilughaqa 
\f2\i nalleghaghhaghmeng
\f0\i0  anglimaa! \'91My cousin has grown 
\f2\i so
\f0\i0  tall!\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 110)	long (too ~ !)	too much! 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  too long!											too much!; too long!						nallegha,  nalleq	nallegha,  nalleq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 , \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
nalleghaghhalek	yfk]s4f5fksr	big (how ~!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle	
\f0\i0 long time (what a ~!)												how big!; what a long time!		< nallegha-ghhalek				nalleghaghhalek	nalleghaghhalek	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
nalleghiite-	yfk]s47ns-	occupy a large amount of time or space		nalleghiituq \'91it has taken a long time, it is very big\'92 /													to occupy a large amount of time or space		< nallegha-(ng)ite-				nalleghite-	nalleghxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nallekevyeghagh-, nallekevzeghagh-	yfk]srsdqs4f4-. yfk]srsdps4f4-	crazy (act ~)		nallekevyeghaghtuq \'91he acted crazy\'92 / nallekevyeghaataa \'91he acted crazy over it\'92													to act crazy		< nalla-?-vleghaq				nallekevyeghagh-, nallekevzeghagh-	nallekevyeghagh-, nallekevzeghagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -, \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1079 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nalleqiiyaghute-	yfk]s27z4ens-	even up		nalleqiiyaghutuq \'91he made something equal\'92; nalleqiiyaghutaa \'91he made it even\'92 /	equalize												to even up; to equalize		< nalla-?-				nalleqiyaghute-	nalleqxyaghute-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1251 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nalleqliq*	yfk]s2k]b2	relative (kin)															relative (kin)		< nalla-qliq				nalleqliq*	nalleqliq*	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
nallghusagh-	yfk]5ecz4-	fix		Enkaangam tawani mitiingemi 
\f2\i nallghusaghaqa
\f0\i0  Sivuqaq unguvaviga qutem yugan. \'91And so there at the meeting I 
\f2\i sought to clarify
\f0\i0  that St. Lawrence Is. was a land where people could live (well).\'92 (PANGEGH. 52)	correct	set straight											to fix; to correct; to set straight						nallghusagh-	nallghusagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
nallimsagh-	yfk]bvcf4-	estimate		sivuyagtem samanlluku aghveq nallimsaghluku aghveqaa \'91the striker guessed where the whale was underwater, and struck it\'92; Aqeftapagmeng nallimsaghluku Uuyneq tevyalghiinga akivaghquutkaniimalghiinga \'91I went from Aqeftapak hoping to get to Uuyneq, but I was little off to the south\'92	determine												to estimate; to determine				CK A & W 57		nallimsagh-	nallimsagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1084 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nallu-	yfk]/-	ignorant (be ~ (due to lack of experience, immaturity, etc.))		nalluuq \'91he is ignorant\'92 / Ilangi yugem 
\f2\i nallupigtaqelghiit
\f0\i0 . \'91Some people are so 
\f2\i stupid
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 111)													to be ignorant (due to lack of experience, immaturity, etc.); to be stupid; to lack common sense		PE na@u-			 > nalluke, nallunagh-, nallungughte-, nalluyagute-, nalluyug-	nallu-	nallu-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 -\
nalluke-	yfk]/rs-	not know		nallukaa \'91he doesn't know it\'92 /	know (not ~)												to not know		< nallu-ke\super 2\nosupersub -			; > nallukengaagh-	nalluke-	nalluke-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -\
nallukngwaagh-	yfk]/r3164-	awareness (lose ~)			know (not ~ completely)												to lose awareness; to not completely know		< nalluke-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-				nallukngwagh-	nallukngwxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
nallunagh-	yfk]/yf4-	know (difficult to ~)		nallunaghtuq \'91it is hard to understand\'92 / naayghat nullunaghtut umegneghmi \'91the mountains are hard to find in a blizzard\'92	perceive (difficult to ~)	understand (difficult to ~)								difficult to know, perceive or understand			to be difficult to know or perceive		< nallu-nagh-			; > nallunatun, nalluniigh-, nalluniite-	nallunagh-	nallunagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nallunatun	yfk]/yfney	certainty (without ~)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 without certainty		< nallunagh-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 nallunatun	nallunatun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
nallungughte-	yfk]/3e5ns-	incoherent (be ~)		nallungughtuq \'91he is incoherent\'92 /	confused (be ~)												to be incoherent; to be confused		< nallu-(ng)ughte-				nallungughte-	nallungughte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nalluniigh-	yfk]/y74-	mark so as to make easier to locate		nalluniighaa \'91he marked it\'92 / Sazinga? Tagneghtestaghpenga; uyavaneng esghaghaqnaghaatnga ukazit, afsengaat. Natenngam ivaghiniighnaqsinga? 
\f2\i Nalluniighutestaghpenga
\f0\i0 ! \'91What did you do to me? You made me black; form afar hares and mice can see me. How am I going to hunt game? You have caused me to 
\f2\i be marked such that I can be easily spotted.
\f0\i0 \'92 (AANGHHAQ 28)													to mark so as to make easier to locate		< nallunagh-(ng)igh- 				nallunigh-	nallunxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nalluniilkutaq 	yfk]/y7k]renf2	marker															marker		< nalluniite-kutaq				nallunilkutaq 	nallunxlkutaq 	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nalluniite-	yfk]/y7ns-	easy to know or perceive		naayghat aliineghmi \'91the mountains are easy to see on a clear day\'92	readily visible												to be easy to know or perceive; to be readily visible		< nallunagh-(ng)ite-				nallunite-	nallunxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nalluyagute-	yfk]/zuens-	unable to comprehend		nalluyagutaa \'91he can't comprehend it\'92 /	lose (knowledge about) something												to be unable to comprehend; to lose (knowledge about) something		< nallu-yagute-				nalluyagute-	nalluyagute-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nalluyug-	yfk]//u-	unsure (be ~)			doubt (be in ~)												to be unsure; to be in doubt		< nallu-yug-			; > nalluyugsaghaan, nalluyuke-	nalluyug-	nalluyug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1102 \u1075 -\
nalluyugsaghaan	yfk]//[cz46y	riddle															riddle		< nalluyug-saghagh-(u)n				nalluyugsaghan	nalluyugsaghxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1102 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u257 \u1085 \
nalluyuke-	yfk]//rs-	doubt		nalluyukaa \'91he doubts it\'92 /													to doubt		< nalluyug-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				nalluyuke-	nalluyuke-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -\
nalpagh-	yfk]gf4-	excited (be very ~)		nalpaghtuq \'91he's very excited\'92 / angyalek nalpaghtuq aghvengluni \'91the boat captain is elated over catching a whale\'92	elated (be ~)												to be very excited; to be elated						nalpagh-	nalpagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nalpeghtugh-	yfk]gs5ne4-	feel one\'92s way		nalpeghtughtuq \'91he felt or guessed his way\'92; nalpeghtughaa \'91he felt for it\'92 /	guess one\'92s location, try												to feel one's way; to try to guess one\'92s location		PE nay(0)p03tu3- (under PE nay(0)p0t-)				nalpeghtugh-	nalpeghtugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nalpiqugh-	yfk]gb2e4-	compare		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 to compare	chfdybdfncz			CK V & E 138		nalpiqugh-	nalpiqugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nalqigangite-	yfk]2buf3bns-	careless (be ~)		nalqigangituq \'91he is careless, untidy\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nanqigte-	untidy (be ~ (especially in housekeeping))												to be careless; to be untidy (especially in housekeeping)						nalqigangite-	nalqigangite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nalqigtaq	yfk]2b[nf2	relative (kin)			kin	clansman											relative (kin); clansman	,kbprbq hjlcndtyybr			CK V & E 73; SLI Cur. Res. Man. 149		nalqigtaq	nalqigtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nalqiiwhagh-	yfk]271[f4-	careless (be ~)		nalqiiwhaqak qamiyek mulunghituk naavuk \'91the sled (that was made) carelessly) didn\'92t last long, it broke\'92; ulimaani taayughqem nalqiiwhaghluki taqughaghtaghii \'91he was in a hurry, so he finished his carvings any old way\'92	any old way (do things ~)												to be careless; to do things any old way				CK A & W 57		nalqiwhagh-	nalqxwhagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1265 \u1093 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nalqiiwhaq	yfk]27[1f2	careless person															careless person				VK		nalqiwhaq	nalqxwhaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1093 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
nalqik	yfk]2br	one\'92s own		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  elpesineng nalqik angyangnaqitek \'91try to get a boat of your own\'92; nalqik allgeghuteqaghlleghhiini pinightuq \'91to get something for one\'92s own use is good\'92	own (one\'92s ~)												one\'92s own				CK A & W 57		nalqik	nalqik	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \
nalqu	yfk]2e	relative (kin)			clan member (fellow ~)	family member								community member			relative (kin); fellow clan member; family member; community member	hjl. ctvmz. ctvtqyfz j,otyf	PY-S nalqu				nalqu	nalqu	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \
nalug-	yfk/u-	land from the air		nalugtuq \'91it landed\'92; nalugaa \'91it landed on it\'92 / nalugumaaq \'91it has landed (and stayed put)\'92; tengegkayuget nalukaagut esnakun \'91the airpane landed on the shore\'92; Anipa napaqam nuvukrugakun 
\f2\i nalugtuq
\f0\i0 . \'91An owl 
\f2\i landed
\f0\i0  on top of the pole.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 109)													to land from the air		PE nallu!-			> nalughqutagh-, nalugutaq, nalugute-, naluumsigh-, nalugvik	nalug-	nalug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -\
nalughqutagh-	yfke52enf4-	jump up and down		qikmiq petugtaaq nalughqutaghluni qenwat iikutuq \'91the dog jumped up and down so much that it broke out of it\'92s leash\'92; ukazit nalughqutameng igleghnequt \'91rabbits get around pretty well by hopping\'92	hop or jump around												to jump up and down; jump or hop around				CK A & W 57		nalughqutagh-	nalughqutagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nalugtaq	yfk/[nf2	decoy duck			duck used as decoy												decoy duck; duck used as decoy		< nalug-te\super 1\nosupersub -aq				nalugtaq	nalugtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nalugtiin	yfk/[n7y	bird decoy line			decoy line of birds used as decoys												bird decoy line		< nalugta-?-(u)n				nalugtin	nalugtxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1251 \u1085 \
nalugutaq	yfk/uenf2	decoy (dead bird used as a ~)															dead bird used as a decoy		< nalug-(u)taq				nalugutaq	nalugutaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b nalugute-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub yfk/uens-\super \'a1	\nosupersub jump across		nalugutuq \'91he jumped across something\'92; nalugutaa \'91he jumped across it, landed carrying it\'92 / nalugutfikaa \'91he jumped across to it\'92	land with												to jump across; to land with		< nalug-(u)te\super 3\nosupersub -				nalugute-1	nalugute-1	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub nalugute-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub yfk/uens-\super \'99	\nosupersub dive in (to the water)		nalugutuq \'91he dove in\'92/													to dive in (to the water)		PE nalu!-				nalugute-2	nalugute-2	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub nalugvik	yfk/udbr	airfield		nalugvikaa \'91it landed on it\'92; Sighinek wata angliiquq, nekeftaqiit  nutaghat aangelghiit guygut, aanguq igaghviga, aghalighviga, 
\f2\i nalugvilguuq
\f0\i0  v\'e6r\'92tolyot-mun. \'91(The town of) Sireniki grows more and more; they erect large new buildings; its school is large and also its clinic; it has a 
\f2\i landing place
\f0\i0  for helicopters (v\'e6r\'92tolyot).\'92 (AANGHHAQ 153)	landing strip	airport								place where birds, planes, etc., land			airfield or airport; landing strip; place where birds, planes, etc., land		 < nalug-vik				nalugvik	nalugvik	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
naluumsigh-	yfk0vcb4-	hop about															to hop about		< nalug-?-				nalumsigh-	nalxmsigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\

\f1\b nampa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub yfvgf\super s	\nosupersub number			numeral												number; numeral		from English \'91number\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 160		nampae	nampae	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1084 \u1087 \u1072 \u1099 \
nanaaghaq*	yfy64f2	bear cub (polar ~)		= nanughhaghaq	cub (polar bear ~)								looks good				polar bear cub	,tksq vtldt;jyjr	< nanuq-aghaq		Rub. 356		nanaghaq*	nanxghaq*	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nanaaq	yfy62	polar bear skin with fur		nanaaghmeng kamiighnaqniiquq nuliighminun \'91he says that his wife will make him boots out of polar bear skin\'92; qimugsiqayuget neghighluku nanaaghmeng aqupiitiqayuget \'91long ago those who went by dog sled used polar bear skin as a mat\'92	bear skin with fur (polar ~)												polar bear skin with fur		< nanuq-?		CK A & W57		nanaq	nanxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
nanevgagh-	yfysduf4-	grow old (of a man)		nanevgaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nanevgaghaa \'91he has grown or is growing old\'92 /													to grow old (of a man)						nanevgagh-	nanevgagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nanevgaghtaq	yfysduf5nf2	father															father		< nanevgaq-taq\super 1				\nosupersub nanevgaghtaq	nanevgaghtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nanevgaq	yfysduf2	old man		
\f2\i Nanevgaaghtukung
\f0\i0  piniyugtegpenaamta. Ilangi qawaaget anglaminat, whangkutung aliitaqukung kiiginaghmi. \'91We\sub 2\nosupersub  are becoming 
\f2\i old men
\f0\i0  without having any joy in life. Other birds are a delight to behold, but we can be seen readily only in summer.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 28)	man, old												old man						nanevgaq	nanevgaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
nangaghalleq	yf3f4fk]s2	way of life		nangaghallghat Quutmiit whangkunneng allangughtaa whani kiyaghtaallemnni, taawa \'91the way of life of the Siberians (Chukotkan Yupik people) at this time is different from ours for certain\'92; aghnaghaam taam nangaghalleghqek atami nangaghallghegketun ayuquk elngaatall \'91that girl's personality certainly resembles her father's\'92; angyam taam nangaghallgha ulimanaken whanga ulimaamtun uutun ayuqekanighluku \'91make that boat's form similar to the one I made\'92; lion-em nangaghallghi kitim nangaghallghistun ayuqelghiit \'91a lion's behavior is similar to that of a domestic cat\'92	culture	personality or behavior								form			way of life; culture; personality; behavior; form; lore		< nange-(?)-lleq\super 2 \nosupersub (?)				nangaghalleq	nangaghalleq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
nangaghneq	yf3f4ys2	way of life		Sivuqam Nangaghnegha \'91the Lore of St. Lawrence Island\'92 
\f2\i (book series title)	
\f0\i0 culture	personality or behavior								form			way of life; culture; personality; behavior; form; lore		< nange-?-neq\super 1\nosupersub  (?)				nangaghneq	nangaghneq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
nangaghte-	yf3f5ns-	snow-drift (form a big ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 cover with snow								check; we don\'92t seem to have anything like this, unless this is related to CAY nangerte- \'91to stand\'92, but then the CED has this at its own entry along with some other things that don\'92t too well correspond				to form a big snow-drift; to cover with snow	yfvtnfnm lkbyysq. dscjrbq ceuhj,.pfyjcbnm cytujv xnj-k>			Rub. 357		nangaghte-	nangaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nangaqaghte-	yf3f2f5ns-	go straight on through															to go straight on through		< nange-?				nangaqaghte-	nangaqaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nange-	yf3s-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > nangaqaghte-, naange-, nangenqagh-, nangeteghugh-															PE na&0-				nange-	nange-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 -\
nangenqagh-	yf3sy2f4-	unplanned side-trip or extension of a trip (take a ~)		Angyaneng uteghninghilkumta 
\f2\i nangenqaamaninakefsikut
\f0\i0  Ungazimun. \'91If we don\'92t return from the boat hunting trip you should know that we have 
\f2\i gone on
\f0\i0  to Chaplino (or to Chukotka in general).\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 112)													to take an unplanned side-trip or extension of a trip		< naange-?-				nangenqagh-	nangenqagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nangeteghugh-	yf3sns4e4-	give up hope		nangeteghughtuq \'91he gave up hope\'92 / nangeteghuutaa \'91he gave up hope for him or it\'92; telaanangalghiit kelutmun qiivluteng taaga nangeteghughtut \'91the sailboat turned toward land, and then continued sailing toward it\'92	go to a place and continue on	stay too long							check Rub.\'92s glosses: \'91to stay forever in the given place; to be paralysed with something (e.g. fright); to stay too long\'92 (V & E also says this)				to give up hope; to go to a place and continue on; to stay too long		< nange-?		CK A & W 58 on 2nd gloss		nangeteghugh-	nangeteghugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nanggha-	yf34f-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > nangghalug-, nangghanaq																			nanggha-	nanggha-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 -\
nanggha-	yf34f-	interesting		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  nangghayugtuq \'91he is interesting in something, excited by something\'92; nangghanaghtuq \'91it is interesting\'92; nanghghanaq \'91interesting thing\'92; iviighennguq esgha nangghanalghiit ayumiq sama esnami uglaghluteng iglakgalegnguq \'91they say that whaling ceremonies with singing were very interesting long ago down at the beach\'92	exciting												interesting; exciting						nanggha-	nanggha-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 -\
nangghalug-; nangghayug-	yf34fk/u-. yf34f/u-	excited (feel ~)			interested (be ~)												to feel excited; to be interested		< nanggha-?-				nangghalug-; nangghayug-	nangghalug-; nangghayug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -, \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 -\
nangghaniite-	yf34fy7ns-	unintersting (be ~)			boring (be ~)												to be uninteresting; to be boring		< nanggha-naq-(ng)ite-				nangghanite-	nangghanxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nangghite-	yf34bns-	right (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 correct (be ~)												to be right; to be correct						nangghite-	nangghite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nangghu-, nangghughi-	yf34e-. yf34e4b-	disapprove of someone or something		nangghuuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nangghughiiq \'91he is criticizing someone or something\'92 /	criticize someone or something	denigrate someone through comparison with another											to disapprove of someone or something; to criticize someone or something; to denigrate someone through comparison with another		PY na&3u(3)-				nangghu-, nangghughi-	nangghu-, nangghughi-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 -, \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 -\
nangghuke-	yf34ers-	criticize		nangghukaa \'91he criticized it\'92/ yugem nangghukumakanga panigmi aghneghsaghtulleghqaa saaqwlimeggnun \'91the man disapproved of his daughter's decision to spend the day with their next door neighbor\'92	denigrate (him) through comparison with another	disapprove of (him)											to criticize; to denigrate (him) through comparison; to disapprove of (him)		< nangghu-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				nangghuke-	nangghuke-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 -\
nanghiigh-	yfy474-	try		nanghiightuq \'91he tried something\'92; nanghiighaa \'91he tried it\'92 / Ataasimeng aghneghmi naani qavaaluku 
\f2\i nanghiighnaluni
\f0\i0  pugimameng pimalghii. \'91One day while his mother was sleeping he decide to 
\f2\i try
\f0\i0  swimming.\'92 (QUNGLUK 17); Neghighluku 
\f2\i nanghiighutaqelghiit
\f0\i0  kilgaani esghaatuuneghmeggni, allakutunneghmeggnillu. \'91Long ago men would 
\f2\i challenge
\f0\i0  each other when they met in the wilderness especially if they were from different places.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 111); Wiin sivukluteng pikusinun maligsaaghulluteng unangniighmun piinliqayuget liitkayuget tawaten 
\f2\i nanghiighluku
\f0\i0  mughunniiq. \'91In order to learn they would go out with those experienced in hunting on the ice and learn from them and thus they learned to hunt game by actually 
\f2\i experiencing 
\f0\i0 it.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:130); Sivuqam igleghneghani tamaakut aqelqat kaanneghata 
\f2\i nanghiighyaghqaawaqelghiit
\f0\i0 , iknaqetulngi, sukatulngi. \'91According to the custom of Gambell whenever those visitors would arrive they would have 
\f2\i trials
\f0\i0  concerning strength and speed.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:48)	test	experience								challenge			to try; to test; to experience; to challenge						nanghigh-	nanghxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nanghiiqu-	yfy472e-	try to do something		nanghiiquuq \'91he tried to do something\'92; nanghiiqwaa \'91he tried to do something to it \'91/													to try to do something		< nanghiigh-?-				nanghiqu-	nanghxqu-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1251 \u1179 \u1091 -\
nangigali-	yf3bufkb-	start going or coming over to someone\'92s place much more often		sangami taana nangigalighllaguuq whangkunnun \'91I wonder why he is coming to our place more often now\'92													to start going or coming over to someone\'92s place much more often				CK A & W  58		nangigali-	nangigali-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 -\
nanglii-	yf3k7-	gaze (into the distance)		nangliiguq \'91he gazed (into the distance)\'92/ nangliitkaa \'91he gazed at it\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nunii-	stare												to gaze (into the distance); to stare 						nangli-	nanglx-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1251 -\
nangllagh-	yf3k]z4-	cool off (of a person)		nangllaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nangllaghaa \'91he cooled off\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nenglek													to cool off (of a person)						nangllagh-	nangllagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
nangllaghaghte-	yf3k]z4f5ns-	chill (get a ~ (of a person))		nangllaghaghsaqunang aanegkuvek \'91don't get a chill when you go out\'92													to get a chill (of a person)		< nangllagh-aghte-				nangllaghaghte-	nangllaghaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nangllaghaq	yf3k]z4f2	harpoon tip edge			blade cover								check; looks totally new				edge of a harpoon\'92s tip;  blade cover	ktpdbt yfrjytxybrf ufhgeyf			Rub. 359;  V. Slwooko		nangllaghaq	nangllaghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nangllaghqe-	yf3k]z52s-	open one's eyes very wide		nangllaghquq \'91he opened his eyes wide\'92 /													to open one's eyes very wide						nangllaghqe-	nangllaghqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nanglleg-	yf3k]su-	compassionate		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  nangllegyugtuq \'91he feels pity or compassion\'92; nangllekaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nangllegyukaa \'91he pities her, feels compassion toward her\'92; nangllegnaghtuq \'91he is pitiful\'92; nangllegtaghtuq \'91he is a compassionate person\'92	pity (feeling ~)												compassionate; feeling pity.		PE na&@0!-			; > nangllegnaghhalek, nangllegnatun	nanglleg-	nanglleg-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 -\
nangllegnaghhalek	yf3k]suyf5fksr	pitiful (how ~!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle													
\f0\i0 how pitiful!		< nanglleg-nagh-ghhallek				nangllegnaghhalek	nangllegnaghhalek	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
nangllegnatun	yf3k]suyfney	pitifully		
\f2\i adverbial particle													
\f0\i0 pitifully		< nanglleg-nagh-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 nangllegnatun	nangllegnatun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
nangllegsiisiq	yf3k]s[c7cb2	supplication		Aghveghmun tawavek 
\f2\i nangllegsiisiq
\f0\i0 . \'91(It (the ceremony) was) a 
\f2\i supplication
\f0\i0  in regard to (catching) whale.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:222)	prayer												supplication; prayer		< nanglleg-sigh-(u)siq				nangllegsisiq	nangllegsxsiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
nangqalugpagte-	yf32fke[gf[ns-	alerted suddenly while doing something		kelengayugem saam elpegyugem, qimugsighhaq igleghtekestaghngaaghmi qikmii nangqalugpagtaalluteng aygumun  qiifqaghulluku teghiighusimakangat \'91while the man was dog sledding something alerted his dogs and they ran towards the north\'92; unugmi taghnughhaat ilungani naghaalghiit tenglugtughluki nangqalugpagtaasimalghiit \'91while the children were playing at night, someone\'92s knocking alerted them\'92													to be alerted suddenly while doing something				CK A & W 58		nangqalugpagte-	nangqalugpagte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1091 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nangqwalek	yf321fksr	yellow-billed loon		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  naangquq; 
\f2\i Nangqwalget
\f0\i0  nunivagmi naayvaan esnengakun ighnikayuget. \'91
\f2\i Yellow-billed loons
\f0\i0  lay eggs in the tundra on the shore of the its lake.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 112)	loon, yellow-billed	
\f2\i Gavia adamsii											
\f0\i0 yellow-billed loon (Gavia adamsii)						nangqwalek	nangqwalek	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
nangrug-	yf3heu-	rubbed (get ~)		nangrugtuq \'91it got chafed\'92 /	chafed (get ~)	long for someone								worn (get ~ out)			to get rubbed, chafed or blistered; to long for someone; to get worn out		PY na&9u!-				nangrug-	nangrug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 -\
nangrughqe-	yf3he52s-	blister		nangrughquq \'91it blistered\'92; nangrughqaa \'91it made it blister\'92 /													to blister		< nangrug-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				nangrughqe-	nangrughqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1088 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nangsagaq	yf3czuf2	partner (male ~ of male, from another clan with whom one cooperated and would exchange wives)			exchange wives (male partner of male, from another clan, with whom one would cooperate and ~)												male partner of male, from another clan, with whom one would cooperate and exchange wives						nangsagaq	nangsagaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
nangughyug-	yf3e4m/u-	lonely (get ~)		Kingungitneng avaqutama 
\f2\i nangughyugumaanga
\f0\i0  elngaatall. \'91After my children [left] I 
\f2\i got very lonely
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 113)													to get lonely						nangughyug-	nangughyug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
Nangupagaghmii(t)	yf3egfuf4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< Nangupagaq-mii			xxxt	Nangupagaghmi(t)	Nangupagaghmx(t)	\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Nangupagaq	Yf3egfuf2	site on the coast east of Gambell		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on the coast east of Gambell						Nangupagaq	Nangupagaq	\uc0\u1053 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
nangyagh-	yf3mz4-	wince		nangyaghtuq \'91he winced\'92 / nangyaghnaghtuq \'91it is dangerous\'92; nangyaghyugtuq \'91he is fearful\'92; nangyaghtaghtuq \'91he is always fearful\'92; nangyaqluku qaprak siku ateghvikengita \'91he felt that it was too risky to go on the moving ice so he didn't go on it\'92; nangyaamakanga ungipaanneghmeng nanevgaq qinuumsi yugneng meghmi pelighqelghiineng \'91he fears telling the sickly old man about the men who perished in the sea\'92	hesitate	fear											to wince; to hesitate; to fear		PE na&ya3-			> nangyiite-, nangyaghnaq	nangyagh-	nangyagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
nangyaghnaq	yf3mz4yf2	danger											sounds okay				danger	jgfcyjcnm	< nangyagh-naq		Rub. 361		nangyaghnaq	nangyaghnaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
nangyiigate-	yf3q7ufns-	brave (be ~)		nangyiigatuq \'91he is brave\'92 /													to be brave		< nangyagh-(ng)igate-				nangyigate-	nangyxgate-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1251 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nangyiite-	yf3q7ns-	brave (be ~)		nangyiituq \'91he is brave\'92 /													to be brave		< nangyagh-(ng)ite-				nangyite-	nangyxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nangzeghaq*	yf3ps4f2	blubber (hard seal ~)		
\f2\i Nangzeghaat
\f0\i0  neqesghaaluteng piniraaghinaat. \'91The 
\f2\i hard seal blubber
\f0\i0  is good for [fox] bait.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 113)													hard seal blubber						nangzeghaq*	nangzeghaq*	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1079 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nani 	yfyb	where?		
\f2\i interrogative demonstrative adverb;
\f0\i0  navek \'91to where?\'92; natmun \'91toward where?\'92; naken \'91from where?\'92; nagun? \'91which way, through where?\'92; naanta? \'91where is it?\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  na-, naten	when (at what specific time)? 												where?; when (at what specific time)?	ult				; > nata(e), naverugllak; 	nani 	nani 	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
nanilghaq	yfybk4f2	lamp stand			stand for lamp												lamp stand		PY-S nanil3aq; < naniq-lghaq				nanilghaq	nanilghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
naniq1	yfyb2\'a1	lamp (oil ~)			oil lamp												oil lamp		PE nani3			> nanilghaq	naniq1	naniq1	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 1\
naniq2	yfyb2\'99	covered part of stern of boat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf.
\f0\i0  naniq\super 1\nosupersub  
\f2\i and the possibility that an oil lamp was kept in this protected area of the boat													
\f0\i0 covered part of stern of boat				CK Rub 357		naniq2	naniq2	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 2\
naniqetaq	yfyb2snf2	covering of stern of  boat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 covering of stern of  boat				CK Rub 357		naniqetaq	naniqetaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nanivegyug-	yfybdsum/u-	feel like one is getting to one\'92s destination fast		ullghitagnekun igleghsuwhaaghaqngami nanivegyugluni repall gginani saapegkaa \'91when he was first travelling on a snowmachine, he felt he was getting to where he has going so fast that he covered his face (in fear)\'92													to feel like one is getting to one\'92s destination fast				CK A & W 58		nanivegyug-	nanivegyug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
nanqek	yfy2sr	stomach of herbivorous animal		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 stomach of herbivorous animal				CK Rub 357		nanqek	nanqek	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1099 \u1082 \
nanqigte-	yfy2b[ns-	judge		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nalqiganite-; 
\f2\i Nanqigtigpenasi
\f0\i0  ilagpesineng enkaam Kiyaghneghem 
\f2\i nanqiggneghillisi
\f0\i0 , \'85. \'91Do not 
\f2\i judge
\f0\i0  your fellows and God will not 
\f2\i judge
\f0\i0  you, \'85.\'92 (Matthew 7.1)	test												to judge; to test		PE nalqi!- (under PE na@0-)				nanqigte-	nanqigte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nanqigtista	yfy2b[nbcnf	judge		 \'85 luuraq avutkistegpek tuunayukangaten 
\f2\i nanqigtistemun
\f0\i0 . \'91\'85 it may happen then that your accuser will turn you over to the 
\f2\i judge
\f0\i0 .\'92 (Matthew 5.25)													judge						nanqigtista	nanqigtista	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
nanqigtivik	yfy2b[nbdbr	court		Kitum avutkumakangaten seghletun pimaniluni, ilaliighaghhnaken aglaasimaluten 
\f2\i nanqigtivigmun
\f0\i0 , \'85. \'91If someone accuses you of wrongdoing you should come to terms with him as you are going to 
\f2\i court
\f0\i0 , \'85.\'92 (Matthew 5.25)													court						nanqigtivik	nanqigtivik	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
nanugh-	yfye4-	hanging lengthwise		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0 nanughtuq \'91it is hanging lengthwise\'92; nunughtaa \'91he hung it lengthwise\'92; nanughngaaq \'91it is hung lengthwise\'92; atkuni qelghusimaa nanughtaghtesqelluku \'91he had his parka be hung lengthwise\'92; nanughngaan pinaken \'91hang it up lengthwise\'92													hanging lengthwise				CK A & W 59		nanugh-	nanugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nanughagh-	yfye4f4-	catch polar bear			polar bear (catch ~)												to catch polar bear		< nanuq-agh-				nanughagh-	nanughagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nanughaghtaq	yfye4f5nf2	skin pants with special design on back worn only by strongest men															skin pants with special design on back worn only by strongest men		< nanughagh-?				nanughaghtaq	nanughaghtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nanughhaghaq*	yfye5f4f2	polar bear cub			bear cub (polar ~)	cub (polar bear ~)								
\f2\i Ursus maritimus 
\f0\i0 (polar bear) cub			polar bear 
\f2\i (Ursus maritimus) 
\f0\i0 cub		< nanuq-ghhaq-(g)aq				nanughhaghaq*	nanughhaghaq*	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nanughugtaagh-	yfye4e[n64-	crouch		nanughugtaaghtuq \'91he is crouching\'92 / 													to be crouching; to crouch		< nanugh-?				nanughugtagh-	nanughugtxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
nanuq*	yfye2	polar bear		
\f2\i Nanuq
\f0\i0  igleghtaquq nunmaakw, sikut pakigaqluki, naaghwaaghumaghmi. \'91The 
\f2\i polar bear
\f0\i0  moves slowly, pulling itself across the ice, sniffing as it goes.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 74)	bear, polar	
\f2\i Ursus maritimus											
\f0\i0 polar bear (Ursus maritimus)		PE nanu3			> nanughagh-, nanughaghtaq, nanughhaghaq	nanuq*	nanuq*	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \
napa-	yfgf-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > napagh-, napaqaq, napaqutaq, napataq, napaziiq, napakutaq, napaqiliq															PE napa-				napa-	napa-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 -\
napaatagh-	yfg6nf4-	signal with pole and flag															to signal with pole and flag						napatagh-	napxtagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
napaataq	yfg6nf2	pole and flag for signaling during a hunt															pole and flag for signaling during a hunt		< napagh-(u)taq				napataq	napxtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
napagh-	yfgf4-	erect		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  napaghtuq \'91it got erected\'92; napaghtaa \'91he erected it\'92;  napaghngaaq \'91it is erect\'92	upright												erect; upright	...  2. yfxbyfncz ghfplybr	PE nappa3- (under PE napa-); < napa-?		... CK V & E 98 (on festival one)		napagh-	napagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 -\
napaghpag-	yfgf5gfu-	hopes rise		napaghpagtuq \'91his hopes went up\'92 /	straighten something quickly												for one's hopes to rise; to straighten something quickly		< napagh-ghpak (?)				napaghpag-	napaghpag-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
napaghrakegte-	yfgf4hfrs[ns-	upright and strait (be ~)		napaghrakegtuq \'91it is upright\'92 /													to be upright and straight		< napagh-?-kegte-				napaghrakegte-	napaghrakegte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
napaghte-	yfgf5ns-	celebrating (begin ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E)									
\f0\i0 check this gloss V & E also says this in page 98				to begin celebrating	yfxbyfnm ghfplyjdfnm			Rub. 361		napaghte-	napaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
napaghusaq	yfgf4ecz2	prize given in a competion															prize given in a competion		< napaghte-(u)saq				napaghusaq	napaghusaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
napaghwiigh-	yfgf4q74-	place a mast (on a ship)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				to place a mast (on a ship)	cnfdbnm vfxne \'f8yf celyt\uc0\u960 	< napagh-(ngw/ghw/w)aaq-ligh-		Rub. 361		napaghwigh-	napaghwxgh-	\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1253 \u1251 \u1271 -\
napaghyaq	yfgf4mz2	mast			pole	post											mast; pole; post		PE napa3ya3 (under PE napa-); < napagh-?				napaghyaq	napaghyaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
napaqaq	yfgf2f2	pole on land															pole on land		< napa-kaq\super 1				\nosupersub napaqaq	napaqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
napaqiliq	yfhf2bkb2	rock-throwing game played in a sitting position			game of rock throwing played in a sitting position												rock-throwing game played in a sitting position		< napaqaq-?		from SLI JR. DICT. p. 114		napaqiliq	napaqiliq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
Napaqutaghmii(t)	Yfgf2enf4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~) 											location of origin? on Siqluk or Yttygran Island				a particular clan		< Napaqutaq-mii		CK	xxxt	Napaqutaghmi(t)	Napaqutaghmx(t)	\u1053 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Napaqutaq	Yfgf2enf2	former village on Yttygran Is. in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village on Yttygran Is. in Chukotka		< napa-qutaq		CK	; > Napakutaghmiit	Napaqutaq	Napaqutaq	\uc0\u1053 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
napaqutaq, napaqetaq	yfgf2enf2. yfgf2snf2	stake															stake		< napa-qutaq				napaqutaq, napaqetaq	napaqutaq, napaqetaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 , \u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
napataq	yfgfnf2	pillar-like or block-like mass of ice on sea ice field		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  napatak,
\f2\i  for one such pillar-like ice mass; see item 35 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	pillar	post  								sea ice condition			pillar-like mass of ice on ice field; pillar; post		< napa-taq\super 1				\nosupersub napataq	napataq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
napaziiq	yfgfp72	stem of plant			mountain sorrel	dwarf fireweed 
\f2\i (Epilobium latifolium)								Oxyria dignya 
\f0\i0 stem			stem of plant (
\f2\i especially
\f0\i0  mountain sorrel
\f2\i  (Oxyria dignya) 
\f0\i0 or dwarf fireweed 
\f2\i (Epilobium latifolium)
\f0\i0 )		< napa-?-		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 63		napaziq	napazxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1079 \u1251 \u1179 \
napena	yfgsyf	wood, soft															soft wood						napena	napena	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \
napi-	yfgb-	go hunting		napiiq \'91he went hunting\'92 /	hunt								VK says \'91to go someplace\'92 				to go hunting		< napu\super 2\nosupersub -li-				napi-	napi-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 -\
napluq	yfgk]/2	joint		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  = naflu	hinge	crack in ice											joint; hinge; crack in ice	otkm dj kmle	PE naplu				napluq	napluq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \

\f1\b napu\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub yfge\super \'a1	\nosupersub cross-piece of sled															cross-piece of sled		cf. PE napu \'91cross-piece of sled\'92		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 139		napu1	napu1	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1091 1\

\f1\b napu\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub yfge\super \'99	\nosupersub blind for netting birds															bird-netting blind				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 33		napu2	napu2	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1091 2\
naqam	yf2fv	but instead		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  naqam aanaqunga upughanneghilkefsinga \'91consequently I'm leaving because you didn't make me feel welcome\'92; 
\f2\i ; 
\f0\i0 Naliq menutukan aliksaliisaghqaa taam. Qaatkesaliisaghqaa. Tawateteftuq.  Sameng 
\f2\i naqam
\f0\i0  seghleliighmeng avangituq. \'91Whichever one that will be stronger, the other one will fear him. He will start obeying him. It is that way. 
\f2\i Such being the case,
\f0\i0  there wasn\'92t any trouble.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:16); Elngaatall taakut piniqegkangat. 
\f2\i Naqam
\f0\i0  avaqutiilnguk. Taawanginaq nulighqutiinalghiik. \'91They liked him very much. That being 
\f2\i in as much as
\f0\i0  they had no children. They were just a man and wife.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 44)	such being the case	consequent to the fact that								in as much as			but instead; such being the case; consequent to the fact that; in as much as		from Chukchi naqam \'91but, so, however\'92				naqam	naqam	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \
naqamalla	yf2fvfk]f	lucky		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  ilangit naqamalla ayveghaasimaat \'91the others are lucky they got walruses\'92													lucky				CK Rub 349 CK		naqamalla	naqamalla	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \
naqamill	yf2fvbk]	but instead		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 such being the case	consequently											but instead; such being the case; consequently		from Chukchi naqam \'91but, so, however\'92 and suffix				naqamill	naqamill	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \
naqamllu	yf2fvk]/	even		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  ighivgaq naqamllu sukalluteng taaqumalghiit \'91it turns out that yesterday they quickly finished\'92	it turns out that												even; it turns out				CK Rub 350 CK		naqamllu	naqamllu	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
naqamwan	yf2fv1fy	okay then		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  naqamwan tugunaketen qikminka, wiin iitghi ilunganun \'91very well, take my dogs, go inside for now\'92	very well												okay then; very well				CK Rub 350		naqamwan	naqamwan	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \
naqenqaghqe-	yf2sy2f52s-	full (be ~ of the moon)		tanqiq naqenqaghquq \'91the moon is full\'92; Quunpeng tanqiq 
\f2\i naqenqaghqenghani 
\f0\i0 tungyupagllagaqaa. \'91Always whenever the moon 
\f2\i is full 
\f0\i0 there\'92s a very high tide.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 21)													to be full (of the moon)						naqenqaghqe-	naqenqaghqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nara-	yfhf-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > narangigh-, naranghite-																			nara-	nara-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 -\
naranghigh-	yfhfy4b4-	loose (come ~ (of something  not securely fastened))		naranghightuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  naranghighaa \'91it came loose\'92 /													to come loose (of something  not securely fastened)		< nara-neq\super 2\nosupersub -(ng)igh-				naranghigh-	naranghigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
naranghite-	yfhfy4bns-	loose (be ~ (of something  not securely fastened))		naranghituq \'91it is loose\'92 /													to be loose (of something  not securely fastened)		< nara-neq\super 2\nosupersub -nghite-				naranghite-	naranghite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naraqe-	yfhf2s-	figure out measurements			prepare (by measuring)												to figure out measurements; to prepare (by measuring)		PE na9aq0- (under PE na90-)				naraqe-	naraqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nasagh-	yfcz4-	put on one's hood		nasaghtuq \'91he put on his hood\'92; nasaghaa \'91he put her hood on her\'92 /													to put on one's hood						nasagh-	nasagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
nasaghaq	yfcf4f2	hood for travelling		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 nasaghak,
\f2\i  for one hood													
\f0\i0 hood for travelling		< nacaq-ghaq		CK Rub 363		nasaghaq	nasaghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nasaghiitaq	yfcz47nf2	head scarf			scarf (head ~)												head scarf		< nasaq-(ng)iitaq				nasaghitaq	nasaghxtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nasaghuk	yfcz4er	covering of frost or ice over rock jutting up from the water		
\f2\i seen in fall when spray freezes in the air but ocean is still largely ice-free; see item 36 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	frozen spray on rocks in or near ocean												covering of frost or ice over rock jutting up from the water; frozen spray on rocks in or near ocean		< nasaq-?				nasaghuk	nasaghuk	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \
nasallenguq	yfczk]s3e2	Sabine\'92s gull			gull (Sabine\'92s ~)	
\f2\i Xema sabini											
\f0\i0 Sabine's gull
\f2\i  (Xema sabini)		
\f0\i0 PY naca@&aq (under PE naca3); < nasaq-?-				nasallenguq	nasallenguq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
nasaperalek	yfczgshfksr	bird species, brown-headed		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined									
\f0\i0 species?				brown-headed bird species		< nasaperaq-lek				nasaperalek	nasaperalek	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
nasaperaq	yfczgshf2	hat		Esghaghyaqufsiki Ungazighmiit aatkiit nuqutupaaghrugllaaguut, nasiilnguut 
\f2\i nasaperameng
\f0\i0  nasaqelghiit. \'91You should have seen the Chaplinio people with their parkas without hoods open at the neck, haaving 
\f2\i hats
\f0\i0  instead of hoods.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:198)	cap												hat; cap		< nasaq-peraq				nasaperaq	nasaperaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
nasaq	yfcz2	parka hood		Taagken Ukaamangatem 
\f2\i nasani
\f0\i0  mataghsimakanga. Mataghsaqminigu gginaa yugem esghaamakanga. \'91Then Ukaamangan pulled back her 
\f2\i parka hood.
\f0\i0  When she took it off the man saw her face.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 37)	hood (parka ~)												parka hood		PE naca3				nasaq	nasaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
nasig-	yfcbu-	cry after or for someone who is leaving (of a child who doesn't want to be left)		nasigtuq \'91he cried after someone\'92; nasigaa \'91he cried after or for her\'92 /													to cry after or for someone who is leaving (of a child who doesn't want to be left)		PE nacci!-				nasig-	nasig-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 -\
nasigutaq	yfcbuenf2	stick with bulge on end		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 stick with bulge on end		< nasig-(u)taq		CK Rub 362		nasigutaq	nasigutaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nasiigh-	yfc74-	pull the hood back from one's head		nasiightuq \'91he pulled back his hood\'92; nasiighaa \'91he pulled the hood back her head\'92 /													to pull the hood back from one's head		< nasaq-(ng)igh-				nasigh-	nasxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nasiqe-	yfcb2s-	take home as much as one wants or needs		nasiquq \'91he took home enough, as much as he wanted\'92 / neghsameng nasiquq \'91he took home enough seal(s)\'92	take enough												to take home as much as one wants or needs; to take enough					; > nasiqun, nasiqute-	nasiqe-	nasiqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nasiqun	yfcb2ey	example															example		< nasiqe-(u)n				nasiqun	nasiqun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
nasiqute-	yfcb2ens-	set an example		nasiqutuq he took enough; nasiqutaa he gave her enough /	take or give enough	approximate							check Rub.\'92s glosse: \'91to weigh up something; to count on somebody or something; to aim at something; to throw at random\'92				to set an example; to take or give enough;  approximate		< nasiqe-(u)te-				nasiqute-	nasiqute-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
naspete-, naspeqe-	yfcgsns-. yfcgs2s-	estimate		naspetaa \'91he estimated it\'92 / naspeqaa atkugmun \'91he's estimating it for a parka\'92; naspequtaa qiipaghqaghhmeng \'91he's estimating the cloth for it\'92													to estimate		PE nay(0)p0t-				naspete-, naspeqe-	naspete-, naspeqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -, \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
Nasqaghmii(t)	Yfc2f4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< Nasqaq-mii			xxxt	Nasqaghmi(t)	Nasqaghmx(t)	\u1053 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Nasqaq	Yfc2f2	Naskak Camp (site) on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Naskak Camp (site) on St. Lawrence Is.						Nasqaq	Nasqaq	\uc0\u1053 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
nasqillagute-	yfc2bk]fuens-	fall or slip and hit the ground right with one\'92s head		qiighnarewaaghmi qiighnilluni nasqillagutevziimalghii \'91he slipped on a slippery part and almost landed on his head\'92; nasqillagulluni kazivaallugmiqumalghii \'91he fell and landed on his head on the ground, and became dizzy\'92													to fall or slip and hit the ground with one\'92s head		< nasqugh-?		CK A & W 59		nasqillagute-	nasqillagute-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nasqinaaq	yfc2by62	stump of tree		
\f2\i found on the beach	
\f0\i0 trunk of tree												stump of tree; tree trunk		< nasqugh-?				nasqinaq	nasqinxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
nasqugh-	yfc2e4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > nasqillagute-, naasquq, nasqinaaq, nasqughiitaq, nasqughun, nasqumtaq, nasqunghrek																			nasqugh-	nasqugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nasqughiitaq	yfc2e47nf2	headband		nasqughiitighluni tevyaaghsuggaaqaaguq \'91he started \'93going around the rope\'94 (in the gymnastic type activity) by putting his head through the noose\'92	rope which fits over the head used in a certain gymnastic type activity												headband; rope which fits over the head used in a certain gymnastic type activity		< nasquq-(ng)iitaq		CK A & W 59		nasqughitaq	nasqughxtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nasqughun	yfc2e4ey	amulet worn over the head		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 amulet worn over the head		< nasqugh-(u)n		CK Rub 363		nasqughun	nasqughun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
nasqumtaq	yfc2evnf2	arrowhead		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check				arrowhead	ujkjdrf cnhtks	<
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 naasquq-?		Rub. 363		nasqumtaq	nasqumtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nasquneq	yfc2eys2	skull of walrus		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  nasqunghek,
\f2\i  for one skull	
\f0\i0 walrus skull												walrus skull		< nasquq-neq\super 2				\nosupersub nasquneq	nasquneq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Nasqutaq	Yfc2enf2	Niyrakpak Lagoon (site at embayment inside ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site at embayment inside Niyrakpak Lagoon (Naayvaghpak) on St. Lawrence Is.						Nasqutaq	Nasqutaq	\uc0\u1053 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nasughagh-	yfce4f4-	estimate		nasughaghaat kaatelleghqaa maalghu aghneq \'91they predict his arrival to be in two days\'92; akemkut nasughalleghmeggni ighivgaqunnguq tanqiq tuqaanaquq \'91the people (from far away, from the mainland) predict there will be a lunar eclipse tonight\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nasuqe-	predict												to estimate; to predict				CK A & W 60 		nasughagh-	nasughagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nasuqe-	yfc/2s-	measure		nasuqaa \'91he estimated it\'92 / nasuqiiq \'91he estimated something\'92; nasuqellemni \'91in my judgment\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nasughagh-	judge	estimate											to measure; to judge; to estimate		PY naacuqe- (under na9a-)				nasuqe-	nasuqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nasuqun	yfc/2ey	example		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 pattern	model							check				example; pattern; model	j,hfptw. ghbvth	< nasuqe-(u)n		Rub. 363		nasuqun	nasuqun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \

\f1\b nata\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub yfnf\super s	\nosupersub where (on possessor)															where (on possessor)		< na(ni)-te\super 4\nosupersub -				natae	natae	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \
nateghqaq	yfns52f2	sole of skin-boot															sole of skin-boot		< nateq-kaq\super 2				\nosupersub nateghqaq	nateghqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
natekeruugte-	yfnsrsh8[ns-	upset (get ~)		natekeruugtuq \'91he got upset\'92 / natekeruugngaaq \'91he is upset\'92	critical (become ~ of something)												to get upset; to become critical of something		< naten-?-				natekerugte-	natekerxgte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
natelnguq*	yfnsk3e2	what kind		natelnguq pinaqsigu? \'91what kind will you have, what kind will you do something to?\'92													what kind		< natete-nguq				natelnguq*	natelnguq*	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
natelnguunngam	yfnsk38y3fv	what kind then		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 what kind then		< natelnguq-
\f2\i plural
\f0\i0 =ngam				natelngunngam	natelngxnngam	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1263 \u1085 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
naten	yfnsy	which way		particle; naten kiyaghtaqsin? \'91how are you?\'92; naten ayuqaqa esla? \'91how is the weather?\'92; naten una ulimaazigu? \'91how did you make this?\'92	how	somehow											how; which way; somehow		< na(ni)-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 naten	naten	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \
natengiighhaq	yfns395f2	little bit		
\f2\i adverbial particle;
\f0\i0  \'85 angerkavavleghaaguq 
\f2\i natengiighhaq
\f0\i0  Unazighmiit anyaghpagitneng. \'91\'85 it was a 
\f2\i little
\f0\i0  bigger than the Chaplino people\'92s ship.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:14)	slightly	temporarily											a little bit; slightly; temporarily		< naten-ngiighhaq				natengighhaq	natengxghhaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
natenkaghte-	yfnsyrf5ns-	get how much		natenkaghta? \'91how much did he get?\'92; = natetkaghte-													to get how much		< naten-kaghte-				natenkaghte-	natenkaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
natentuq	yfnsyne2	wonder if		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 what if												what if; I wonder if		< naten=tuq				natentuq	natentuq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \
nateq	yfns2	entry or front outer room of the traditional dome-shaped house		naatgha \'91its entry\'92; Sulpik iiwenllu naaygham 
\f2\i naatghanun
\f0\i0  kaataquq naken sangwaa nagallaataghaa. \'91Just as Sulpik got to the 
\f2\i foot
\f0\i0  of the mountain, he heard that strange voice again.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 53); Yugem qikmimi qaghlungi 
\f2\i nateghqun
\f0\i0  agaghtii. \'91The man hung up his dag\'92s harness in the 
\f2\i entry room.
\f0\i0 \'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 106)	lower level	floor								bottom part of a boat, mountain, etc.			entry or front outer room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.); lower level; floor; bottom part of a boat, mountain, etc.		PE nat03			; > nateghqaq, nateqlite-, naatghigh-, natigh-	nateq	nateq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \
nateqfagh-	yfns2af4-	descend		tagituk quulvansaghluni nateqfaghtuq \'91the fog was high, but it is now descending\'92; mesiilghutakek egllum nateqfantepigtuk \'91the oil in the oil tank of the stove is low\'92	go down to lower level												to descend; to go down to lower level		< nateq-vagh- (?)		CK A & W 60		nateqfagh-	nateqfagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1092 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nateqfaq	bfns2af2	lower area															lower area		< nateq-vaq				nateqfaq	nateqfaq	\uc0\u1080 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1092 \u1072 \u1179 \
nateqlite-	yfns2k]bns-	bottom (reach the ~)		nateqlituq \'91he reached the bottom\'92	reach the bottome												to reach the bottom		< nateq-?-				nateqlite-	nateqlite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
natesengetaghhaq*	yfnscs3snf5f2	little (just a tiny ~ bit)			bit (just a tiny little ~)												just a tiny little bit		< naten-?-ghhaq				natesengetaghhaq*	natesengetaghhaq*	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
natesug-	yfnsc/u-	astonished (be ~)		natesugtuq \'91he feels uneasy\'92 / natesugnaghtuq \'91it makes one feel uneasy, is astonishing, out of the ordinary\'92; natesugtestaa \'91he made her feel uneasy\'92	uneasy (feel ~)												to be astonished; to feel uneasy		PY nat0cu!-; < natete-?-(te)sug-				natesug-	natesug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
natesugnatun	yfnsc/uyfney	amazingly															amazingly		< natesug-naq-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 natesugnatun	natesugnatun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
natete-	yfnsns-	which way (be ~)		nateta? \'91what kind is it?\'92; nateskan \'91if it is like that\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 naten	how (be ~)	what kind (be ~)											to be which way; to be how; to be what kind		PE nat0- (under PE na-\super 2\nosupersub )				natete-	natete-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
natetepigte-	yfnsnsgb[ns-	odd (be ~)		natetepigtuq \'91he is odd\'92 /	different (be ~ from others)												to be odd; to be different from others		< natete-pigte				natetepigte-	natetepigte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
natetkaghte-	yfnsnrf5ns-	get how much		natetkaghta? \'91how much did he get?\'92; = natenkaghte-													to get how much		< naten-kaghte-				natetkaghte-	natetkaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
natigh-	yfnb4-	sew sole on boot		natightuq \'91he is sewing on a sole\'92; natighaa \'91he is sewing a sole onto it\'92 /													to sew sole on boot		< nateq-ligh-				natigh-	natigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\
natiin1	yfn7y\'a1	thread (heavy sinew ~ used to sew sole onto a skin-boot)															heavy sinew thread used to sew sole onto a skin-boot		< natigh-(u)n				natin1	natxn1	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1251 \u1085 1\
natiin2	yfn7y\'99	floor		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 flooring												floor; flooring		< nateq-?-(u)n		CK Rub 364		natin2	natxn2	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1251 \u1085 2\
natiisigh-	yfn7cb4-	lay a floor		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 underpin	make a foundation for							check; esp. to see if this should be natiisigh- from natiin (with a broader meaning that what we have) or natesigh- ??				to lay a floor; to underpin; to make a foundation for	yfcnbkfnm gjk ult-k>. gjldjlbnm aeylfvtyn gjl xnj-k>. ltkfnm gjcnfvtyn lkz xtuj-k>	< natiin-ligh-		Rub. 364		natisigh-	natxsigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
natiitngaaghek	yfn7n3]64sr	valley		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); a dual													
\f0\i0 valley		< nateq?		CK Rub 364		natitngaghek	natxtngxghek	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1251 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u257 \u1271 \u1099 \u1082 \
natmun	yfnv]ey	where (toward ~)		natmun pii? \'91toward where was he going?\'92; 
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  nani													toward where						natmun	natmun	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1091 \u1085 \
natu	yfne	which one		natu taghnughhaqsigu? \'91which one is your child?\'92; natu qikmiq piyugsigu? \'91which dog do you want?\'92; 
\f2\i with interrogative endings the verb base
\f0\i0  natungaa- (
\f2\i underlyingly
\f0\i0 : natungau- ) 
\f2\i from underlying expanded base
\f0\i0  *natungaq, 
\f2\i is used rather than
\f0\i0  *natungu-; 
\f2\i thus
\f0\i0 : natungaawa? \'91which one is it?\'92, 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 kina, sa; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 naliq, naten													which one						natu	natu	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \
navaqaate-	yfdf26ns-	out of line (be ~ (of tatoos))															to be out of line (of tatoos)						navaqate-	navaqxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
navegh-				
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > navghagh-, navghiite-, naavghute-															PY-S nav03(a3)-				navegh-	navegh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 -\
navek	yfdsr	where (to ~)		navek pinaqsin? \'91where are you going?\'92; 
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  nani													to where						navek	navek	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1082 \
naverugllak	yfdshe[k]zr	far (very ~ away)															very far away		< navek-ruk-ghllak				naverugllak	naverugllak	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
navghagh-	yfd4f4-	borrow		navghaghtuq \'91he borrowed something\'92; navghaghaa \'91he borrowed it\'92 / navghaasiq \'91something pawned or otherwise loaned out\'92													to borrow		PY-S nav03(a3)-; < navegh-?-				navghagh-	navghagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
navghiite-	yfd47ns-	lend		navghiitaa \'91he lent it\'92 /													to lend		< navghagh-?-				navghite-	navghxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nayak	yfzr	sister (older or younger ~ of male)															sister (older or younger) of male		PE naya!-				nayak	nayak	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1103 \u1082 \
nayemte-	yfqsvns-	stretch out an inflated sea mammal intestine so it will dry straight		ighneghlluget ghhuughluki nayemtiki \'91blow air in to the intestines and stretch it out straight that way\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ayeme-													to stretch out an inflated sea mammal intestine so it will dry straight				CK A & W 60		nayemte-	nayemte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nayeqerregagh-	yfqs2sisuf4-	stay closeby		qepghaannaluni tamaa yuuk nayeqerregaataquq luuraq qepghaqalinnayukangisteng \'91the men are hanging around in case they get jobs\'92													to stay closeby		< nayugh-?-		CK A & W 60		nayeqerregagh-	nayeqerregagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1096 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Nayghapaget	Yfq4fgfusn	Myghapowit Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Niykhapakhit Lake and Myghapowit Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.												Myghapowit Mtn. (and Niykhapakhit Lake) on St. Lawrence Is.		< nayghaq(> naayghaq)-?-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Nayghapaget	Nayghapaget	\uc0\u1053 \u1072 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \

\f1\b Nayghapak\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Yfq4fgfr\super \'a1	\nosupersub Naskak Camp (Nasqaq) (small hill east on coast from ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices; cf. 
\f0\i0 naayghaq \'91mountain\'92													small hill east on coast from Naskak Camp (Nasqaq)  on St. Lawrence Is.		< nayghaq(> naayghaq)-?				Nayghapak1	Nayghapak1	\uc0\u1053 \u1072 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 1\

\f1\b Nayghapak\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Yfq4fgfr\super \'99	\nosupersub Niyghapak Pt. at the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is. (mountain behind ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 mountain behind Niyghapak Pt. at the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is.		< nayghaq(> naayghaq)-?				Nayghapak2	Nayghapak2	\uc0\u1053 \u1072 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 2\
Nayghwaaq	Yfq4162	Mugum Peak on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Mugum Peak on St. Lawrence Is.						Nayghwaq	Nayghwxq	\uc0\u1053 \u1072 \u1253 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
nayiq	yfqb2	hollow area under the surface of the ground or ice		sigugneq sama ifkaannaghqwaamaa nayiighllagluni ayuquq \'91the ice edge is dangerous, one can fall off it because it is hollow\'92; Kayunnaghaquq iqanengenaaghmeng 
\f2\i nayiitni
\f0\i0  taan\'92gani qalmesani. \'91One can catch sculpins, arctic (staghorn) sculpins, there in the reefs in their 
\f2\i crevices
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AKINGQWAGH. 22); Anigulluglluni lliighyalghiimi taakut 
\f2\i nayiita
\f0\i0  akeleghraagha meghaangluni, tamaaken meqegkat. \'91When the snow became soft, getting that way, the area in the middle of those 
\f2\i crevices
\f0\i0  got water.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:120); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nayug-, 
\f2\i and 
\f0\i0 nayuq	crevice												hollow area under the surface of the ground or ice; crevice				CK A & W 60		nayiq	nayiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1253 \u1080 \u1179 \
nayug-	yf/u-	skin an animal (or an organ such as a stomach) starting at the mouth and doing it in such a way that the skin is not split															to skin an animal (or an organ such as a stomach) starting at the mouth and doing it in such a way that the skin is not split		PE nayu!-				nayug-	nayug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 -\
nayugh-	yf/4-	stay with		nayughaa \'91he is tending her\'92 / nayughiiq \'91he is tending someone\'92	tend	watch over								babysit			to stay with; to tend; to watch over; to guard; to babysit		PE nayu3-				nayugh-	nayugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 -\
nayuq	yf/2	site		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); questioned; cf. 
\f0\i0 nayiq	position								check; sounds totally new				site; position	vtcnjgjkj;tybt			Rub. 369		nayuq	nayuq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1102 \u1179 \
nayute-	yf/ns-	close in around (of ice)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  sikum nayusimaa angyaghpak \'91the ice closed in around the ship\'92													to close in around (of ice)				CK Rub 369		nayute-	nayute-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1102 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nayvagh-	yfqdf4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > nayvaghaq, naayvaq															PE nanva3				nayvagh-	nayvagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Nayvaghaat	Yfqdf46n	Troutman Lake (lakes and ponds south of ~ next to Gambell)		
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91little lakes\'92; 
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Ninivahut Lake and other nearby small lakes												lakes and ponds south of Troutman Lake next to Gambell; Ninivahut Lake and other nearby small lakes		< nayvaq(> naavyaq)-ghaq-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Nayvaghat	Nayvaghxt	\uc0\u1053 \u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \
nayvaghaq	yfqdf4f2	pond															pond		< nayvaq(> naayvaq)-ghaq				nayvaghaq	nayvaghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nazi-	yfpb-	remove hair from and scrape reindeer skin			scrape reindeer skin after removing hair												to remove hair from and scrape reindeer skin					> nazikaq	nazi-	nazi-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 -\
nazigh-	yfpb4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > nazighaq, nazisungaq															PE nayyi3				nazigh-	nazigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 -\
Nazighaghsiq	Yfpb4f5cb2	February		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time (?) of ring seals\'92; 
\f2\i also given in various sources as 
\f0\i0 January-February, February, February-March, March, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  April													February		< nazighaq-siq				Nazighaghsiq	Nazighaghsiq	\uc0\u1053 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
nazighaq	yfpb4f2	ring seal, long-haired			
\f2\i Phoca hispida 
\f0\i0 (ring seal) long haired	seal (long-haired ring ~)											long-haired ring seal
\f2\i  (Phoca hispida)		
\f0\i0 < nazigh-ghaq			; > nazighaghsiq	nazighaq	nazighaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nazikaq	yfpbrf2	reindeer skin, dehaired and scraped		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nazigh-													dehaired and scraped reindeer skin						nazikaq	nazikaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
nazisungaq	yfpbc/3f2	ring seal, short-haired			
\f2\i Phoca hispida 
\f0\i0 (ring seal) short-haired	seal (short-haired ring ~)											short-haired ring seal 
\f2\i (Phoca hispida)		
\f0\i0 < nazigh-PY cu&aq				nazisungaq	nazisungaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \
nefkagh-	ysarf4-	watch for a seal at its breathing hole		Tamaana yuuk naghughqughluku awalighpigaaghllutek 
\f2\i nefkaghaqelghiik
\f0\i0 . \'91But, instead of staying together with them, they went way ahead of the others and sigugneq sama ifkaannaghqwaamaa nayiighllagluni ayuquq \'91the ice edge is dangerous, one can fall off it because it is hollow\'92; Kayunnaghaquq iqanengenaaghmeng 
\f2\i nayiitni
\f0\i0  taan\'92gani qalmesani. \'91One can catch sculpins, arctic (staghorn) sculpins, there in the reefs in their 
\f2\i crevices
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 22)													to watch for a seal at its breathing hole						nefkagh-	nefkagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nefku	ysare	meat hung outside to dry															meat hung outside to dry		PE n0vku				nefku	nefku	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1091 \
nefku-	ysare-	hang meat to dry		nefkuuq \'91he is hanging meat to dry\'92; nefkwaa \'91he is hanging it to dry\'92 /													to hang meat to dry						nefku-	nefku-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1091 -\
nefkuli-	ysarekb-	prepare meat for drying		nefkuliiq \'91he is preparing meat for drying\'92; nefkulii \'91he is preparing it\'92 /													to prepare meat for drying		< nefku-li-				nefkuli-	nefkuli-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 -\
nefkutaq	ysarenf2	pole used to hang meat to dry															pole used to hang meat to dry		< nefku-(u)taq		CK Rub 396		nefkutaq	nefkutaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nefkuuraq	ysar8hf2	dried meat			meat, dried												dried meat		< nefku-?				nefkuraq	nefkxraq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1263 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
nefsukaghlleq	ysac/rf5k]s2	slush ice temporarily stuck at edge of fast ice		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  neve-	ice (slush ~  temporarily stuck at edge of fast ice)												slush ice temporarily stuck at edge of fast ice						nefsukaghlleq	nefsukaghlleq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1092 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
nefteghqe-	ysans52s-	assemble		nefteghquq \'91he assembled something\'92; nefteghqaa \'91he assembled it\'92 / kakisik nefteghqughaak \'91he put the sewing machine together\'92	put together												to assemble; to put together		< neftegte-ghqe\super 2\nosupersub -				nefteghqe-	nefteghqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
neftegte-	ysans[ns-	fasten		neftegtaa \'91he fastened it, put it in place\'92 / Igaqegkanka minglekun 
\f2\i neftegtanka
\f0\i0 . \'91I 
\f2\i put
\f0\i0  my pictures on the wall.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 116); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 neve-	hang up	put in place											to fasten; to hang up; to put in place						neftegte-	neftegte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
negagh-	ysuf4-	snare															to snare		PE n0!a3				negagh-	negagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
negaghaq	ysuf4f2	snare made of baleen for catching ducks															snare made of baleen for catching ducks		< negaq-ghaq				negaghaq	negaghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
negaghpak	ysuf5gfr	fishnet															fishnet		< negaq-ghpak				negaghpak	negaghpak	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
negaghpawaaq	ysuf5gf162	grating (or lattice) inside (under?) kettle		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 looks good, check for what exactly this lattice or grating is				grating (or lattice) inside (under?) kettle	htitnrf dyenhb xfqybrf	< negaq-ghpak-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		Rub. 383		negaghpawaq	negaghpawxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
negaq	ysuf2	snare			bird snare												snare; bird snare		PE n0!a3				negaq	negaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
negeve-	ysusds-	rip open (of seam)		puvitangi negevaghaghsimalghiit ilamineng pilluwaghluni \'91the ruff on his hood ripped open when he fought with his friend\'92													rip open (of seam)		PE 0!um0(t)- 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  0!0m0(t)-		CK A & W 60		negeve-	negeve-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
negh<e>-	ys4\'f8s\uc0\u960 -	eat		neghtuq \'91he ate\'92; neghaa \'91he is eating it\'92 / sameng neghsin? \'91what did you eat?\'92; neghaquq \'91he is eating; he eats\'92; neghellequq \'91he will eat\'92; neghegkan \'91when he eats\'92; neghelta \'91let\'92s eat\'92; neghefqiita \'91don\'92t eat them\'92; 
\f2\i in some respects this base acts as if it were
\f0\i0  negh- 
\f2\i (as in the examples with 
\f0\i0 neghtuq 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  neghsin 
\f2\i above) while in other respects it acts as if it were
\f0\i0  neghe- ; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  megh<e>; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  neneq													to eat		PE n030-			xxxe	negh<e>-	negh<e>-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 (\u1099 )-\
neghaali-	ys46kb-	slow down (of person, event, occurrence, etc.)		eslallugiisan kiiwem maaqelleghqek neghaaliik \'91when there wasn\'92t any more rain, the flow of the river slowed down\'92; qepghalghiit neghaalingigatngwaaghtut \'91those working haven\'92t slowed down at all\'92	die down (of person, event, occurrence, etc.)												to slow or die down (of person, event, occurrence, etc.)				CK A & W 60		neghali-	neghxli-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1083 \u1080 -\
neghagte-	ys4f[ns-	drain (overly full lake going down)		naayvam sikunga suflughragtekuni neghaglleqaa \'91when the ice in the lake melts, it will drain out\'92; naayvat neghagtaqii \'91the lakes are draining out\'92													to drain (overly full lake going down)				CK A & W 60		neghagte-	neghagte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
neghesta	ys4scnf	parasite		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 = neghista													parasite		<  negh<e>-(s)ta		Rub 385		neghesta	neghesta	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
Neghesti	Ys4scnb	Thanksgiving (holiday)		
\f2\i Neghestimi
\f0\i0  tamaghhaghmi neqenghaghqegkayuk. \'91On 
\f2\i Thanksgiving Day
\f0\i0  everyone feasted.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 123)													Thanksgiving (holiday)		< negh<e>-?-				Neghesti	Neghesti	\uc0\u1053 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1080 \
neghigh-	ys4b4-	happened (have ~ long ago)		
\f2\i used mainly with transitive subordinative endings;
\f0\i0  neghighluku piiqsalghiikut \'91a long time ago we used to do this\'92; Iteghyaghaam  Anagutaghmun  
\f2\i neghighluku
\f0\i0   apellgha \'91told 
\f2\i long ago
\f0\i0  by Iteghyaghaq to Anagutaq\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:222); 
\f2\i Neghighluku
\f0\i0  sangwaat yuget naken kaaanneghata maakumiingungilnguut aqelqat. Sivuqam igleghneghani tamaakut aqelqat kaanneghata nangiighyaghqaawaqelghiit, iknaqetulngi, sukatulngi. \'91
\f2\i Long ago 
\f0\i0 whenever some people from anywhere, not local people, they were visitors. In accordance with the custom of Gambell when they arrived there would be competions concerning strength and speed.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:48)	long ago (have happened ~)												to have happened long ago						neghigh-	neghigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
neghightaq	ys4b5nf2	back (something or someone that goes ~)		Nakaa, nekaqa una 
\f2\i neghightaagunga
\f0\i0  una nekaqa whanga. \'91No, It\'92s my house; I am 
\f2\i someone that has gone away
\f0\i0 , but this is my house, mine.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:266)	long ago (thing of ~)												something or someone that goes way back; thing from long ago						neghightaq	neghightaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
neghista	ys4bcnf	parasite		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0  = neghesta													parasite		< negh<e>-?-(s)ta		CK Rub 384		neghista	neghista	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
neghllugh-	ys5k]/4-	fall over head first		neghllughtuq \'91he or it fell over\'92 / neghllughngaaq \'91it has fallen over\'92; Qawaak tugunaqluku 
\f2\i neghlluumaanga
\f0\i0 . \'91I 
\f2\i fell into the water
\f0\i0  trying to take the bird.\'92 (SLI. JR. DICT. 117)	topple												to fall over head first; to topple over						neghllugh-	neghllugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
neghnapik	ys4yfgbr	king crab			crab (king ~)	
\f2\i Paralithodes camtschatica											
\f0\i0 king crab 
\f2\i (Paralithodes camtschatica)		
\f0\i0 < neghnaq-pik				neghnapik	neghnapik	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
neghnaq	ys4yf2	crab															crab		< negh<e>-naq			; > neghnapik, neghnavreghaq	neghnaq	neghnaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
neghnavregaq	ys4yfdhsuf2	rock crab		Esnamun kaalluni igleghsimaluni esghaamakanga esnami unguvalghii tepenghhaq 
\f2\i neghnavregaghhaq
\f0\i0 . \'91When he got to the shore as he was going along he saw on the shore this live 
\f2\i rock crab
\f0\i0  that had just drifted ashore.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 15)	crab (rock ~)	
\f2\i Hyas lyratus or Hyas coarctatus											
\f0\i0 rock crab 
\f2\i (Hyas lyratus 
\f0\i0 or
\f2\i  Hyas coarctatus ?)		
\f0\i0 < neghnaq-vreghaq (?)				neghnavregaq	neghnavregaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
neghneghngwaagh-	ys4ys23164-	scent		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 smell something (about animals)												to scent; to smell something (about animals)	xeznm xnj-k> \'f8j ;bdjnys[\uc0\u960 . y/[fnm. j,y/[bdfnm xnj-k>	< negh<e>-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-		Rub. 385		neghneghngwagh-	neghneghngwxgh-	\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
neghniimsugute-	ys4y7vceu/ns-	snack		qikmit siipneghmeng neghniimsugutaqut \'91the dogs are snacking on left over food\'92; qawaak esnemi sameng neghniimsuguteghllaguuq \'91birds are snacking on something at the coast\'92													to snack		< negh<e>-?-		CK A & W 61 CK		neghnimsugute-	neghnxmsugute-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1084 \u1089 \u1091 \u1075 \u1102 \u1090 \u1099 -\
neghpigaq	ys5gbuf2	main living area		mangtegham neghpigaa \'91the house\'92s main living area\'92													main living area		< na\super e\nosupersub -pigaq				neghpigaq	neghpigaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
neghqe-	ys52s-	feed (dogs, people, etc.)		neghqaa \'91he is feeding it or him\'92 / neghqiiq \'91he is feeding something or someone\'92; Aghhutanga tamaghhaan 
\f2\i neghqaqanka
\f0\i0  qikminka. \'91I 
\f2\i feed
\f0\i0  my dogs every day.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 118)													to feed (dogs, people, etc.)		PY-S n03q0- (under PE n030-); < negh<e>-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				neghqe-	neghqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
neghqugh-	ys52e4-	rheumatism (have ~)		neghqughtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neghqughaa \'91he has aching bones and joints\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 neghqwaaq	arthritis (have ~)	ache in the bones and/or joints											to have rheumatism; to have arthritis; to ache in the bones and/or joints						neghqugh-	neghqugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
neghqughruk	ys52e4her	skeleton			skinny person												skeleton; very skinny person		< neghqwaaq-ruk				neghqughruk	neghqughruk	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
neghqun	ys52ey	feed (for dogs or other animals)															feed (for dogs or other animals)		< neghqe-(u)n				neghqun	neghqun	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
neghqusi-	ys52ecb-	cut up food for dogs															cut up food for dogs		< neghqe-(u)ta-i\super 2		\nosupersub VK		neghqusi-	neghqusi-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 -\
neghqusitaq	ys52ecbnf2	dog food container		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  neghqusitak, 
\f2\i for one such container; 
\f0\i0 neghqutkameng neghqusitak ulevaghaghtagka \'91I filled the dog food container full\'92													dog food container		< neghqe-(u)n-li-(u)taq		CK A & W 61 CK 		neghqusitaq	neghqusitaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
neghqutkaq	ys52enrf2	feed (for dogs or other animals)		= naghqutkaq													feed (for dogs or other animals)		< neghqe-(u)n-kaq				neghqutkaq	neghqutkaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
neghqwaaghtaq	ys52165nf2	bone strip running the length of the keel of skin boat															bone strip running the length of the keel of skin boat		< neghqwaaq-taq\super 1				\nosupersub neghqwaghtaq	neghqwxghtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
neghqwaaq	ys52162	bone		= naghqwaaq	framing member (as of house)												bone; framing member (as of house)		< negh<e>-kwaaq				neghqwaq	neghqwxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
neghsanghaq	ys5czy4f2	rope made from seal skin		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rope made from seal skin		< neghsaq-?		CK Rub 397		neghsanghaq	neghsanghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
neghsapik	ys5czgbr	ring seal, adult		Kamengllaghaqegkangit 
\f2\i neghsapiget
\f0\i0 . Qazigyameng melqulighluku yuget ipigtuluku \'85. \'91They made (hunting) skin-boots from 
\f2\i ringed seal
\f0\i0  (skin). People put spotted seal on the boot legs \'85.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)	seal, ring, adult	
\f2\i Phoca hispida 
\f0\i0 (ringed seal) adult											adult ring seal (Phoca hispida)		< neghsaq-pik				neghsapik	neghsapik	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
neghsaq	ys5cz2	seal		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  negh<e>-; = naghsaq													seal						neghsaq	neghsaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
neghusiq	ys4ecb2	dish			plate	meal											dish; plate; meal		< negh<e>-(u)siq				neghusiq	neghusiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
neghuva-	ys4edf-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > neghuvate-, neghuvaghsagh-															PE  n03uv03- and n03uva3-				neghuva-	neghuva-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 -\
neghuvaghsagh-	ys4edf5cz4-	soft and smooth (make ~)															to make soft and smooth		< neghuva-?-sagh-				neghuvaghsagh-	neghuvaghsagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
neghuvate-	ys4edfns-	soft (be ~)		neghuvatuq \'91it is soft\'92; neghuvalnguq \'91soft thing\'92													to be soft		< neghuva-te\super \'a3\nosupersub -				neghuvate-	neghuvate-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
neghyaghqangllagh-	ys4mz52f3k]z4-	prepare food			food (prepare ~)												to prepare food	ujnjdbnm tle	< neghyaghqaq-ngllagh-		Rub. 386		neghyaghqangllagh-	neghyaghqangllagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
neghyaghqaq	ys4z52f2	food															food		< negh<e>-yaghqaq				neghyaghqaq	neghyaghqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
neghyu-	ys4m/-	hope		neghyuuq \'91he hopes for something\'92 /	expect												to hope; to expect		PE n03yu(!)-				neghyu-	neghyu-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 -\
neghyugtaghagh-	ys4m/[nf4f4-	dream about something		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 rely on somebody								check the postbases, also what is this \'91dream about\'92 ?				to dream about something; to always rely on somebody	vtxnfnm j xtv-k>. gjcnjzyyj yfltznmcz yf rjuj-k>	< neghyu-?-		Rub. 386		neghyugtaghagh-	neghyugtaghagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
neghyuke-	ys4m/rs-	hope concerning (it)		neghyukaa \'91he hopes concerning him or it\'92 / neghyukaqa tagilleghqan \'91I hope that you will come\'92													to hope concerning (it)		< neghyu-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				neghyuke-	neghyuke-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -\
negifkaqu-	ysubarf2e-	appear (of thawed patches)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; what could this be related to???				to appear (of thawed patches)	gjzdkznmcz - j ghjnfkbyf[			Rub. 383		negifkaqu-	negifkaqu-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
negig-	ysubu-	cut out a piece of material or skin		negigaa \'91she cut it out\'92/ negigutuq \'91she cut out something\'92; negilleq \'91a cut out piece\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 negili	tear out of someone\'92s hands												to cut out a piece of material or skin; to tear out of someone\'92s hands				CK V & E 190 (2nd gloss)		negig-	negig-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1075 -\
negighqu-	ysub52e-	cut out the various pieces needed to make something															to cut out the various pieces needed to make something		< negig-qu\super 2\nosupersub -				negighqu-	negighqu-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 -\
negikragh-	ysubrif4-	cut out a pattern															to cut out a pattern		< negig-krak				negikragh-	negikragh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1271 -\
negili	ysubkb	neck opening of garment		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 negig-	collar												neck opening of garment; collar		PE n0!ili3, n0!ila3				negili	negili	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \
negilitaan	ysubkbn6y	trimming at the neck of a woman's hoodless garment															trimming at the neck of a woman's hoodless garment		< negili-?-(u)n				negilitan	negilitxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1085 \
negitelqwaaq	ysubnsk]262	hollow area in collarbone		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 hollow area in collarbone				CK Rub 383		negitelqwaq	negitelqwxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u257 \u1179 \
negitughqe-	ysubne52s-	gasp when food goes down slowly after swallowing		tuufluni negitughquq \'91he swallowed and he is gasping because it is going down slow\'92; sangavek negitughqesin? \'91why are you gasping?\'92													to gasp when food goes down slowly after swallowing		PE n0!ituqa3-		CK A & W 61		negitughqe-	negitughqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
negitughqwe- 	ysubne521s-	hiccup		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R. V&E )													
\f0\i0 to hiccup	brfnm	PE n0!ituqa3-		CK V & E 66 Rub 383		negitughqwe- 	negitughqwe- 	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u1099 -\
Negsipa	Ys[cbgf	Koozata Lagoon (site on north shore of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on north shore of Koozata Lagoon						Negsipa	Negsipa	\uc0\u1053 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \
negugh-	ysue4-	go around an obstacle		negughtuq \'91he went around something\'92; negughaa \'91he went around it, avoided him\'92 / neguutaa \'91he took it around something\'92	avoid												to go around an obstacle; to avoid		PE n0!u3-				negugh-	negugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
neguqragh-	ysue2if4-	force one\'92s way		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); questioned									
\f0\i0 check; there\'92s a semantic problem given the meaning of the postbase here				to force one\'92s way	ghj,bhfnmcz 	< negugh-qragh-		Rub. 384		neguqragh-	neguqragh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1271 -\
neguya	ysuez	ringworm			skin infection												ringworm; skin infection		PE n0!uya3				neguya	neguya	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1103 \
nekaghqaq	ysrf52f2	building site			place for something to be located 								sounds okay, but should be checked				building site; place for something to be located	vtcnj. ghtlyfpyfxtyyjt lkz gjcnhjqrb xtuj-k>> cnhjqgkjoflrf	< na\super e\nosupersub  -kaghqaq		Rub. 386		nekaghqaq	nekaghqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
nekefqaghte-	ysrsa2f5ns-	jump up			take off suddenly								sounds good				to jump up; to take off suddenly	dcrjxbnm. cjhdfnmcz c vtcnf 	< nekeve-qaghte-		Rub. 387		nekefqaghte-	nekefqaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1092 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nekefte-	ysrsans-	build		nekeftaa \'91he built it\'92 / nekeftaat igaghvik \'91they built the school\'92													to build		< nekeve-te\super 1\nosupersub -				nekefte-	nekefte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nekeg-	ysrsu-	put in place		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0  nekegtuq \'91he/it got into its appropriate place\'92; nekegtaa \'91he put it in its appropriate place\'92; nekegngaaq \'91it is in its appropriate place\'92; 
\f2\i Nekeggnakesi
\f0\i0  wayaq igaasim iqugan inglungakun scotch tape-meng 1-1/4 inch piizngaan. \'91
\f2\i Fasten
\f0\i0  the wire to the end of the pencil leaving about 1-1/4 inches protruding.\'92 (SULUWET 25)	have a good home	quieted down											put in place; having a good home; quieted down 		< na\super e\nosupersub -kegte-				nekeg-	nekeg-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1075 -\
nekeggmelleq	ysrs[vsk]s2	peace		
\f2\i in Bible translation													
\f0\i0 peace		< nekegte-mete-lleq				nekeggmelleq	nekeggmelleq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
nekeggneqigte-	ysrs[y]s2b[ns-	restore			put back in the appropriate place								check, but looks okay				to restore; to put back in the appropriate place	djccnfyfdkbdfnm xnj-k.	< nekegte\super 1\nosupersub -nqigte-		Rub. 387		nekeggneqigte-	nekeggneqigte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nekegneghaq	ysrsuys4f2	floor plan		mangtegham nekegneghaa \'91the plan of the house\'92	plan (floor ~)												floor plan		< nekeg-neq\super 2\nosupersub -ghaq				nekegneghaq	nekegneghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nekegpagte-	ysrs[hf[ns-	creak 		Mangteghaq anuqlim 
\f2\i nekegpagtaghqaa
\f0\i0 . \'91The wind made the house 
\f2\i creak
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 119); Unaaghniinenq anuqeghllak 
\f2\i nekegpagtaa
\f0\i0 . \'91The wind 
\f2\i died down
\f0\i0  from the way it was this morning.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 119)	change for the better												to creak; to change for the better		< na\super e\nosupersub -kegte-pagte-				nekegpagte-	nekegpagte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1088 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nekegsiilliqe-	ysrs[c7k]b2s-	worry		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 play noisily								check				to worry; to play noisily	djkyjdfnmcz. ,tcgjrjbnmcz.djpbnmcz	< nekegte-?-liqe- ?		Rub. 387		nekegsilliqe-	nekegsxlliqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nekeve-	ysrsds-	stand up		nekevuq \'91he stood up\'92 / nekevestaa (or nekeftaa) \'91he stood it up, made him stand up\'92													to stand up		PE n0k0v0(t)-				nekeve-	nekeve-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
nekevgha-	ysrsd4f-	standing (be ~)		nekevghaaq \'91he is standing\'92 /													to be standing		< nekeve-?-				nekevgha-	nekevgha-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1271 \u1072 -\
nekga-	ysr[f-	calm down		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 stop rushing												to calm down; to stop rushing	ecgjrfbdfncz. gthtcnfnm vtnfnmcz			CK V & E 154		nekga-	nekga-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1093 \u1072 -\
nekginaq	ysr[byf2	powdery snow															powdery snow						nekginaq	nekginaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1093 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
nekgute-	ysr[ens-	bring something to its place		tamlagluta angyaghput nekgutaqaghputlu aghvenguughtut \'91we landed  and just as we put our boat away, they caught a whale\'92	put away	put in the proper place											to bring something to its place; to put away; to put in the proper place		< nekegte-(u)te-		CK A & W 61		nekgute-	nekgute-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nekleg-	ysrk]su-	die down (of wind)		Anuqeghllak 
\f2\i neklegtuq
\f0\i0 . \'91The strong wind 
\f2\i is dying down
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 119); Ighneghhaghma unulqusiq qiilghwa 
\f2\i neklegataaghaghtuq
\f0\i0  aghsan.\'92 My little boy\'92s coughing the whole night 
\f2\i diminished
\f0\i0  when morning came.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 119)	diminish (of a bad condition)												to die down (of wind); to diminish (of a bad condition)						nekleg-	nekleg-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 -\
nekreg-	ysrisu-	hook as with a gaff		nekregtuq \'91he hooked himself\'92; nekregaa \'91he hooked it\'92 / nekregiiq \'91he hooked something\'92; = nakreg-													to hook as with a gaff						nekreg-	nekreg-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1075 -\
nekrek	ysrisr	hook		= nakrek	gaff												hook; gaff		PE n0!ci!				nekrek	nekrek	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1082 \
nekrewaagh-	ysris164-	crochet															to crochet		< nekreg-aagh-				nekrewagh-	nekrewxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
nekwaagh-	ysr164-	settled down (be ~)															to be settled down		< na\super e\nosupersub -?-				nekwagh-	nekwxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
nelegte-	ysks[ns-	put in place securely															to put in place securely		< na\super e\nosupersub -?-				nelegte-	nelegte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nelgughte-	yskue5ns-	never move once one has stopped		nanuq malighqughluku tagtalmi paghyughyami nelgughtuq \'91I ran after the polar bear, and all of a sudden it got tired and stopped never to go any further\'92													to never move once one has stopped				CK A & W 61		nelgughte-	nelgughte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
neli-	yskb-	build		neliiq \'91he built a house\'92; nelii \'91he built a house for her or made it into a house\'92 /	establish a home	home (establish a ~)											to build; to establish a home		< na\super e\nosupersub -li-				neli-	neli-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 -\
neliite-	ysk7ns-	take up residence at (it, a house)		neliitiit \'91they have made it their home\'92	residence (take up ~ at (it, a house))												to take up residence at (it, a house)		< na\super e\nosupersub -liite-		SLI JR. DICT. 119		nelite-	nelxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nellaaghqe-	ysk]952s-	drive out of one's home		nellaaghqaa \'91he drove it or him from its or his home\'92 /													to drive out of one's home		< na\super e\nosupersub -?-				nellaghqe-	nellxghqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nelliqe-	ysk]b2s-	engage in unacceptable behavior		
\f2\i of children, generally	
\f0\i0 unacceptable behavior (engage in ~)												to engage in unacceptable behavior		< na\super e\nosupersub -lluk-liqe-				nelliqe-	nelliqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nellug-	ysk]/u-	uncomfortable		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  nellugyugtuq \'91he feels uncomfortable, claustrophobic, ill at ease\'92; nellugnaghtuq \'91it makes one feel uncomfortable, ill at ease, claustrophobic\'92	claustrophobic	ill at ease											uncomfortable; claustrophobic; ill at ease		< na\super e\nosupersub -lluk-yug-				nellug-	nellug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
nemegh-	ysvs4-	lash (tie)		nemghaa \'91he tied it (package or the like)\'92 / nemghutaa 
\f2\i box
\f0\i0 -mun \'91he tied it around the box\'92; nemeghluku kakinnaken allighta \'91use an overcast stitch to sew the sealskin sock\'92	tie up	stitch overcase											to lash; to tie up; to stitch overcast		PE n0m03(-)				nemegh-	nemegh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 -\
nemeghyaq	ysvs4mz2	kelp type		
\f2\i exact identification of kelp undetermined; the snake is known through the Bible and from contact with outsiders; 
\f0\i0 Kayagtekumsi penniighestun qungangitnilngughestun amaat lliighlequsi enkaam kelengalusi 
\f2\i nemeghyastun
\f0\i0 , \'85 \'91I am sending you out like sheep into the midst of wolves; so be as wise as 
\f2\i serpents \'85
\f0\i0 .\'92 (Matthew 10.16)	snake	serpent											kelp type; snake; serpent		< nemeq-?-				nemeghyaq	nemeghyaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
nemeq	ysvs2	lashing															lashing		PE n0m03(-)				nemeq	nemeq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \
nemeq	ysvs2	stitch type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 type of stitch				see SLI Cur. Res. Man. 85		nemeq	nemeq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \
nemetwha-	ysvsn1]f-	stay home or in one place		\'85 pengegniighutaaten. Masingka 
\f2\i nemetwhayaaghtaaten
\f0\i0 ." \'91She said to her younger brother, \'93\'85 You are no longer someone who one must worry about. You can 
\f2\i be on your
\f0\i0  just fine
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 now.\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGH. 162)	home (stay ~ or in one place)	be on one\'92s own											to stay home; to stay in one place; to be on one\'92s own		from Chukchi n0m0twak \'91live, reside\'92, probably reinforced by Yupik na\super e\nosupersub  \'91place, home\'92	14			nemetwha-	nemetwha-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1265 \u1100 \u1072 -\
nemghutaq	ysv4enf2	rope, cord, thong, etc. used for lashing			lashing rope, cord, thong, etc.												rope, cord, thong, etc. used for lashing		< nemegh-(u)taq				nemghutaq	nemghutaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
neneq	ysys2	eating (act of ~)		
\f2\i used in the ablative-modalis as the indefinite object of the verb
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to finish\'92: neneghmeng taaqluni \'91after he finished eating\'92; North Star usiista tagiiquq. Aghnequn 
\f2\i neneghmeng
\f0\i0  taaqegkufsi igaghnaanghitusinguq. \'91The North Star freighter is coming. This afternoon when you\'92re done 
\f2\i eating
\f0\i0  there will be no more school.\'92 (SULUWET 3); 
\f2\i Neneghmeng
\f0\i0  taaqsameng, tawatengwaaq tuguluku qayuusiq wine-eghraghameng imalek, \'85. \'91When they finished 
\f2\i eating
\f0\i0 , He lifted that cup full of wine, \'85.\'92 (1 Corinthins 11.25)													act of eating		< negh<e>-neq\super 1				\nosupersub neneq	neneq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
nengaa	ys36	son-in-law		nengaaka \'91my male in-law\'92	brother-in-law (sister\'92s husband)												daughter's husband (son-in-law); brother-in-law (sister's husband)		PE n0&a(C)u(!)				nenga	nengx	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u257 \
nengaawaq	ys361f2	man who is working (according to custom) for the parents of the woman he will marry		w
\f2\i  in this word comes from the ancient form
\f0\i0  *nengauk
\f2\i  (as still in Central Alaskan Yup'ik) of the parent word 
\f0\i0 nengaa 
\f2\i (which itself, however, shows no trace of 
\f0\i0  u)	son-in-law to be												a man who is working (according to custom) for the parents of the woman he will marry; son-in-law to be		< nengaa-ghaq				nengawaq	nengxwaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u257 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
nengaawiqe-	ys361b2s-	work for the parents of the woman one will marry															to work for the parents of the woman one will marry		< nengaawaq-liqe-				nengawiqe-	nengxwiqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nengagh-	ys3f4-	go off angrily or sulking		nengaghtuq \'91he stalked off\'92 /	stalk off												to go off angrily or sulking; to stalk off		PE n0&(&)a3-				nengagh-	nengagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nenge-	ys3s-	stretch		nenguq \'91it stretched\'92 / nengtaa \'91he stretched it, tightened it\'92; nengestaa \'91he made it stretch\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nengug-	tighten												to stretch; to tighten		PE n0&0-				nenge-	nenge-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 -\
nengekeregiigh-	ys3srshsu74-	not reach something		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to not reach something		< nenge-?-		CK Rub 395		nengekeregigh-	nengekeregxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nengenghigh-	ys3sy4b4 	tire, slow down and lose enthusiasm as from working too hard		uygulluku qimugsighllagem qenwat qikmii nengenghightut \'91his dogs are getting tired from pulling too much\'92; qikmima nengenghiitaanga \'91my dogs are getting too slow for me\'92													to tire, slow down and lose enthusiasm as from working too hard				CK A & W 61		nengenghigh-	nengenghigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 \
nengerqagh-	ys3si2f4-	stretch skin		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 to stretch skin	dsnzubdfnm. hfcnzubdfnm irehe			CK V & E 92		nengerqagh-	nengerqagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1096 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Nengesighviget	Ys3scb4dbusn	Vngyat Pt. (creek and valley that comes out near ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 creek and valley that comes out near Vngyat Pt. (Angyat) on St. Lawrence Is.						Nengesighviget	Nengesighviget	\uc0\u1053 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \
nengigh-	ys3b4-	receive a share of a catch which has been distributed		nengightuq \'91he received his share\'92 /													to receive a share of a catch which has been distributed		PE n0&i3				nengigh-	nengigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
nengighqe-	ys3b52s-	divide and distribute one's catch		nengighqaa \'91he divided it\'92 /													to divide and distribute one's catch		< nengigh-ghqe\super 1\nosupersub -				nengighqe-	nengighqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nengighqelleq	ys3b52sk]s2	division (the process of ~)		
\f2\i Nengighqelleghmeng
\f0\i0  liitunga igaghvigmi. \'91I learned to do 
\f2\i division
\f0\i0  in school.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 85)													division (the process of ~)		< nengighghqe-lleq				nengighqelleq	nengighqelleq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
Nengiighhaghmii(t)	Ys375f4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< Nengiighhaq-mii			xxxt	Nengighhaghmi(t)	Nengxghhaghmx(t)	\u1053 \u1099 \u1187 \u1251 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Nengiighhaq	Ys375f2	Ningeehak Beach on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Ningeehak Beach on St. Lawrence Is.		< na\super e\nosupersub -ngiighhaq				Nengighhaq	Nengxghhaq	\uc0\u1053 \u1099 \u1187 \u1251 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
nengiighhaq*	ys375f2	little place or thing		nengiighhaak \'91little old couple\'92	couple (little old ~ 
\f2\i (when used in dual)
\f0\i0 )												little place; little thing; little old couple
\f2\i  (when used in dual)		
\f0\i0 < na\super e\nosupersub -iighhaq				nengighhaq*	nengxghhaq*	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1251 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
nenginaaqu-	ys3by62e-	unable to proceed while traveling (be ~)		akmagluni uusneghwaaghmi quulmun nenginaaqulghii kayusiitaa quulmun \'91he was trying to climb up a bank (hill) with a large pack but he wasn\'92t moving, so he helped him out\'92; ullghitagnekun aghqumlami nenginaaquluni pegnem alpagtuq \'91he couldn\'92t move with his wheeled/tracked vehicle in the marsh,  but then finally he did manage to get out\'92	stuck in place (be ~)												to be unable to proceed while traveling; be stuck in place		< na\super e\nosupersub -(ng)inaq-(ng)u-qu-		CK A & W 62		nenginaqu-	nenginxqu-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 -\
nengiq	ys3b2	share of a catch															share of a catch		PE n0&i3				nengiq	nengiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
nengitugh-	ys3bne4-	have a hard time getting to the desired place or into the desired position or situation (have a ~)		qikmiq wiin ungleghpenani nengitughtuq \'91the dog shuffled around some before it lay down where it wanted to\'92; aqupileghraam nengitughtuq \'91he was being bothered by  the situation so he felt uncomfortable\'92	uncomfortable where or how one is (feel ~)												to have a hard time getting to the desired place or into the desired position or situation; to feel uncomfortable where or how one is		< na\super e\nosupersub -(ng)ite-ugh-		CK A & W 62		nengitugh-	nengitugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nengki	ys3rb	prop		= nenki	support	blind with gun props for hunting											prop; support; blind with gun props for hunting		PY 0&ki-				nengki	nengki	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1082 \u1080 \
nengki-	ys3rb-	prop up		nengkii \'91he propped it up\'92 / = nenki-													to prop up		PY 0&ki-				nengki-	nengki-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1082 \u1080 -\
nenglagh-	ys3kz4-	laugh		nenglaghtuq \'91he laughed\'92 / nenglaatkaa \'91he laughed about it or him\'92; nenglaghtaa \'91he made her laugh\'92; nenglaghqaghtuq \'91he roared with laughter\'92													to laugh		PE 0&la30				nenglagh-	nenglagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 -\
nenglaghnagh-	ys3kz4yf4-	funny (be ~)		nenglaghnaghtuq \'91it is funny\'92 /													to be funny		< nenglagh-nagh-				nenglaghnagh-	nenglaghnagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nenglaghnaq	ys3kz4yf2	funny thing															funny thing		< nenglagh-naq				nenglaghnaq	nenglaghnaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
nenglaghyugsagh-	ys3kz4/[cz4-	make fun of someone		nenglaghyugsaghtuq \'91he made fun of someone\'92 / nenglaghyugsaatkaa \'91he made fun of her\'92													to make fun of someone		< nenglagh-yug-sagh-				nenglaghyugsagh-	nenglaghyugsagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1102 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
nenglasiigh-	ys3kzc74-	chuckle		nenglasiightuq \'91he chuckled\'92 / 													to chuckle		< nenglagh-?-				nenglasigh-	nenglasxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1103 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nenglek	ys3ksr	coldness		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nangllagh-													coldness		PE n0&0(t)- and n0&@i-				nenglek	nenglek	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
nenglekegte-	ys3ksrs[ns-	icy cold (be ~, of liquid or solid, not person or weather)			cold (be ~ cold, of liquid or solid, not person or weather)												to be icy cold (of liquid or solid, not person or weather)		< nenglek-kegte-				nenglekegte-	nenglekegte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nenglengestagh-	ys3ks3scnf4-	giggle		nenglengestaghtuq \'91he giggled\'92 /													to giggle		< nenglagh-ngestaq				nenglengestagh-	nenglengestagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nengli-	ys3kb-	cool off		nengliiq \'91it/he cooled off\'92 / nengliiq puqleghalleghmineng \'91he cooled off from his high fever\'92													to cool off		PE n0&0(t)- and n0&@i-; < nenglek-li-				nengli-	nengli-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 -\
nenglisigh-	ys3kbcb4-	cool off food		nenglisighaa \'91he cooled it off \'91/													to cool off food		< nengli-sigh-				nenglisigh-	nenglisigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
nengllitaq	ys3k]bnf2	tooth that is abnormally sensitive to the cold															tooth that is abnormally sensitive to the cold				CK A & W 62		nengllitaq	nengllitaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nenglliyug-	ys3k]b/u-	sensitive to cold (be abnormally ~)		gguutka nenglliyugllak gguutniightemun kelgulluku ilaaghaa \'91my tooth was really sensitive to the cold, so I had the dentist check it and he put a filling on it\'92													to be abnormally sensitive to the cold				CK A & W 62		nenglliyug-	nenglliyug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1102 \u1075 -\
nenglliyug-	ys3k]b/u-	sensitive to cold (be ~ (especially of teeth))		gguutka nenglliyugtuq \'91my tooth feels sensitive to the cold\'92													to be sensitive to cold (especially of teeth)		< nenglek-?-				nenglliyug-	nenglliyug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1102 \u1075 -\
nengllugun	ys3uk]/uey	housemate		
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  nengllugta; nengllugutet \'91a family\'92; Paapgaq iteghluni qukiitgun 
\f2\i nengllugutmi
\f0\i0  aghuliighumalghii. \'91After coming in Paapgaq stopped in the midst of his 
\f2\i family members
\f0\i0 .\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG.16)	family (fellow ~ member)												housemate; fellow family member		< na\super e\nosupersub -?-(u)n				nengllugun	nengllugun	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1075 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
nenglu	ys3k/	semi-subterrranean house		
\f2\i this is the Yupik form of the Eskimo word which has entered English as
\f0\i0  "igloo"; 
\f2\i the semi-subterranean house was used by Yupik people on St. Lawrence Is. until replaced by the dome-shaped walrus-hide covered Chukchi-style house, 
\f0\i0 mangteghaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  mengteghaq, (
\f2\i now referred to as
\f0\i0  mangteghapik 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  mengteghapik), 
\f2\i in the late 1800\'92s or early 1900\'92s; Nenglu
\f0\i0  qafsin'guyaghta uglaghraak qaya paamna 
\f2\i nenglulighvigilnguq
\f0\i0  tangeghtughllak. \'91One can\'92t say how many 
\f2\i semi-subterranean houses
\f0\i0  there were but it was quite a few, but up there the ground was too hard and there were no 
\f2\i semi-subterranean houses.
\f0\i0 \'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:18)	house, semi-subterrranean 												semi-subterrranean house		PE 0&lu				nenglu	nenglu	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \
Nengluvek	Ys3k/dsr	Koozata Lagoon (site on north shore of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on north shore of Koozata Lagoon						Nengluvek	Nengluvek	\uc0\u1053 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1074 \u1099 \u1082 \
nengpagte-	ys3gf[ns-	yank on a rope			angry (suddenly become ~ and stay that way)												to yank on a rope; to suddenly become angry and stay angry		< nenge-pagte-				nengpagte-	nengpagte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nengqe-	ys32s-	tense (be ~)		nengquq \'91it is tense; he has sore muscles\'92 /	cramp (have a ~)	sore muscles (have ~)											to be tense; to have a cramp; to have sore muscles		< nenge-?-				nengqe-	nengqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nengrak	ys3hfr	skin ailment characterized by itching and redness		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  neguya	dermatitis												skin ailment characterized by itching and redness; dermatitis						nengrak	nengrak	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
nengrugh-	ys3he4-	rheumatism (have ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nengqugh-													to have rheumatism						nengrugh-	nengrugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1088 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nengruuqi-	ys3he2b-	reluctant to go out or go on a trip because the cold (be ~)		uksumi nengruuqinalghii sapeghhnami \'91one can be reluctant to go out in the extreme cold in the winter\'92; sapeghhnaghllak nengruuqingigatutmineng ullghitagni igleghtestaak \'91in as much as he is not being bothered by extreme cold, he started up his snowmachine (in order to ride it)\'92; nengruuqifqaavek aani \'91don\'92t be hesitant due to the cold, go out\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nenglek													to be reluctant to go out or go on a trip because the cold				CK A & W 62; VK		nengruqi-	nengrxqi-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1088 \u1091 \u1179 \u1080 -\
nengsugpagtagh-	ys3c/[gf[nf4-	jerk uncontrollably															to jerk uncontrollably		< nenge-?-		VK		nengsugpagtagh-	nengsugpagtagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nengsugpagte-	ys3c/[gf[ns-	strain a muscle			make an injury worse												to strain a muscle; to make an injury worse		< nenge-?-				nengsugpagte-	nengsugpagte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nengtaatagaq	ys3n6nfuf2	rubber		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 rubber	htpbyf			CK V & E 84; Rub 435		nengtatagaq	nengtxtagaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
nengtaataq	ys3n6nf2	accordian		
\f2\i used in the dual
\f0\i0 , nengtaatak,
\f2\i  for one accordian													
\f0\i0 accordion		< nengte-?-(u)n				nengtataq	nengtxtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nengte-	ys3ns-	stretch (it)		nengtaa \'91he stretched it\'92 /													to stretch (it)		PE n0&0t- (under PE n0&0-); < nenge-te\super 1\nosupersub -				nengte-	nengte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nengug-	ys3eu-	reach across		nengugtuq \'91he reached across\'92; nengugaa \'91he reached across for it\'92 / nengugutaa \'91he waved it in the air\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nenge-	tug												to reach across; to tug		PY-S n0&u!- (under PE n0&0-)		CK V & E 187 CK on 2nd gloss		nengug-	nengug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1075 -\
nengughte-	ys3e5ns-	married (get ~)		nengughtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nengughtut \'91it became populated\'92; nengughtuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  got married, established a home\'92; nengughtelqa \'91my anniversary\'92	populated (become ~)												to get married; to become populated		< na\super e\nosupersub -(ng)ughte-				nengughte-	nengughte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nengugutiiraagh-	ys3euen7h64-	vote		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to vote				CK Rub 394		nengugutiragh-	nengugutxrxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1251 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
nengukagh-	ys3erf4-	snatch		nengukaghaa \'91he snatched it, struck him\'92 /	strike with hand or fish												to snatch; to strike with hand or fist		< nengug-?-				nengukagh-	nengukagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nengulgha-	ys3ek4f-	waves break on the beach		nengulghallghet \'91the place where the waves break or broke\'92; nengulghavikaa \'91the waves reached it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nenguugte-	surf comes up and sweep across beach after waves break												for waves to break on the beach; for surf to come up and sweep across beach after waves break						nengulgha-	nengulgha-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 -\
nengumaste-	ys3evfcns-	household (be the head of ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 lead the household												to be the head of a household; to lead the household		< na\super e\nosupersub -(ng)u-(i/u)ma-(te)ste-		CK Rub 394		nengumaste-	nengumaste-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nenguugte-	ys38[ns-	wind gets stronger		nenguugtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nenguugtaa \'91the wind is picking up\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nengulgha-													for wind to get stronger						nengugte-	nengxgte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nenguwaagh-	ys3e164-	grope sexually															to grope sexually		< nengug-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				nenguwagh-	nenguwxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
nenguyugte-	ys3e/[ns-	live somewhere as if in one\'92s own home		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E)													
\f0\i0 to live somewhere as if in one\'92s own home	;bdtn cdjbv [jpzqcndjv\\ xedcndetn ct,z rfr ljvf. [jpzqybxftn d ljvt	< na\super e\nosupersub -?-		CK V & E 75 Rub 395		nenguyugte-	nenguyugte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nengwaaqe-	ys3162s-	live somewhere as if in one\'92s own home		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E)													
\f0\i0 to live somewhere as if in one\'92s own home	;bdtn cdjbv [jpzqcndjv\\ xedcndetn ct,z rfr ljvf. [jpzqybxftn d ljvt	< na\super e\nosupersub -?		CK V & E 75 Rub 395		nengwaqe-	nengwxqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nengyaapellegaq	ys3m9gsk]suf2	\'93ringtail snail\'94 fish		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 \'93ringtail snail\'94 fish				SLI Cur. Man. 53		nengyapellegaq	nengyxpellegaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
nengyughllak	ys3m/5k]zr	great-grandmother															great-grandmother		< nengyuq-ghllak				nengyughllak	nengyughllak	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
nengyuq	ys3m/2	grandmother		\'93
\f2\i Nengyuuy
\f0\i0 ,\'94 piiq afsengaghhaq, \'93whanga iknaqellghuftunga pinighqaallghuftunga, \'85\'94 \'91\'93
\f2\i Grandma
\f0\i0 ,\'94 said the little mouse, \'93I\'92m the strongest and the best, \'85\'94\'92 (AANGHHAQ 38)													grandmother		PE n0&yu3				nengyuq	nengyuq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \
nengzighhe-	ys3pb5s-	stretch one's body as upon waking		nengzighhuq \'91he stretched\'92 /													to stretch one's body as upon waking		< nenge-?-				nengzighhe-	nengzighhe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1079 \u1080 \u1203 \u1099 -\
nengziik	ys3p7r	grasshopper or grasshopper-like insect		
\f2\i Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined									
\f0\i0 used also on SLI?				grasshopper or grasshopper-like insect						nengzik	nengzxk	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1079 \u1251 \u1082 \
nenki	ysyrb	prop		= nengki	support	blind with gun props for hunting											prop; support; blind with gun props for hunting		PY 0&ki-				nenki	nenki	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1085 \u1082 \u1080 \
nenki-	ysyrb-	prop up		nenkii \'91he propped it up\'92 / = nengki-													to prop up		PY 0&ki-				nenki-	nenki-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1085 \u1082 \u1080 -\
nepasanagh-	ysgfczyf4-	misty (be ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nepsuk	drizzly (be ~)												to be misty or drizzly						nepasanagh-	nepasanagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nepasanaq	ysgfczyf2	mist			drizzle												mist; drizzle						nepasanaq	nepasanaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
nepiigh-	ysg74-	silent (become ~)		nepiightuq \'91he became silent\'92 / nepiighutaa \'91he became silent about it\'92; 
\f2\i Nepiinghata
\f0\i0  aqumneghmini paaghqiiluni. \'91When the 
\f2\i voices stopped
\f0\i0 , she sat up and there was no one to be seen.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:198); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nepuk, ma\super e													\nosupersub to become silent						nepigh-	nepxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nepiiq	ysg72	silence															silence						nepiq	nepxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1251 \u1179 \
nepite-	ysgbns-	unintelligible (be ~)		akuzillgha nepiteghllak enkaam tusaqepanghitaqa \'91his way of talking was unintelligible, so I didn\'92t understand him much\'92	impairment (speak with an ~)												to be unintelligible; to speak with an impairment				CK A & W 62		nepite-	nepite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nepititaghte-	ysgbnbn5ns-	bring a boat (or the like) from the breakers and to secure it		angyaghsi nepititaghlluku ayviitek \'91get your boat away from the waves and secure it first, and then butcher the walrus\'92													to bring a boat (or the like) from the breakers and to secure it				CK A & W 63		nepititaghte-	nepititaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1080 \u1090 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nepneqagh-	ysgy]s2f4-	stick (it -- knife, axe, etc.) into or onto something when not in use		nepneqaghaa \'91he stuck it into something\'92 /
\f2\i  cf. 
\f0\i0 neve-													to stick (it -- knife, axe, etc.) into or onto something when not in use				VK		nepneqagh-	nepneqagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
neprakegtagh-	ysgifrs[nf4-	lack self-control		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to lack self-control				CK Rub 396		neprakegtagh-	neprakegtagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nepsaate-	ysgc6ns-	dirty (get ~)		eslallugmi taghnughhaat nepsaasimalghiit \'91the children got soaking wet in the rain\'92; aghinaghllagmi nepsaasimaat qalingunateng \'91without raincoats they got soaking wet in the rain\'92	wet (get soaking ~)												to get dirty; to get soaking wet				CK A & W 63		nepsate-	nepsxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nepsag-	ysgczu-	soak up liquid		Iingka kuuvluku vegllugmeng 
\f2\i nepsagaqa
\f0\i0 . \'91I spilled my ink and 
\f2\i sopped
\f0\i0  it up with a towel.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 122)	sop up liquid												to soak or sop up liquid		< nepte-?-				nepsag-	nepsag-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 -\
nepsigtaq	ysgcb[nf2	dish made by mixing frozen and then thawed sourdock type plant, seal blood and oil		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 dish made by mixing frozen and then thawed 
\f2\i quvegsi
\f0\i0  (a certain sourdock type plant, 
\f2\i Polygonum tripterocarpum
\f0\i0 ), seal blood and oil				CK Rub 395		nepsigtaq	nepsigtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nepsuk	ysgc/r	wet weather		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nepsanaq	weather, wet												wet weather		PY-S n0pyuk				nepsuk	nepsuk	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
neptaarakegte-	ysgn6hfrs[ns-	dominate a conversation (tend to try to ~)		neptaarakegtutmineng ilakniighutuq \'91since he immediately speaks without thinking, he became unpopular\'92	speak without thinking through what one will say (tend to ~)												to tend to try to dominate a conversation; to tend to speak without thinking through what one will say				CK A & W 63		neptarakegte-	neptxrakegte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1090 \u257 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
neptaarakegte-	ysgn6hfrs[ns-	outspoken (be ~)											???				be outspoken				VK		neptarakegte-	neptxrakegte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1090 \u257 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nepte-	ysgns-	dip into water or other liquid		neptuq \'91he dipped himself in\'92; neptaa \'91he dipped it in\'92 / neptutuq \'91he dipped something in\'92; nepfikaa \'91he dipped something into it\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nepsag-													to dip into water or other liquid		PE n0p0-				nepte-	nepte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nepuk	ysger	sound of many people talking at once		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nepiiq, ma\super e\nosupersub ; Yuget 
\f2\i nepuguteghllaguut
\f0\i0  esnami. \'91Many people 
\f2\i are talking 
\f0\i0 at the beach.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 123)													the sound of many people talking at once		PY n0pu!- (under PE n0p0-)				nepuk	nepuk	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1091 \u1082 \

\f1\b neqa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ys2f\super s	\nosupersub food		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  negh<e>-	flesh												food; flesh		PE n0q0				neqae	neqae	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1099 \
neqagh-	ys2f4-	recall		neqaghtuq \'91he recalled something\'92; neqaghaa \'91he recalled it\'92 / neqaataa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neqaatkaa \'91he recalled something because of it\'92	remember												to recall; to remember		PE 0nqa3-				neqagh-	neqagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
neqamike-	ys2fvbrs-	remember (without having forgotten)		neqamikaa \'91he remembers it\'92 / neqamikiiq \'91he remembers something\'92; neqamikelleqamken\'92 I shall remember you\'92	forget (not ~)												to remember (without having forgotten); to not forget		< neqagh-mik-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				neqamike-	neqamike-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
neqangisag-	ys2f3bczu-	short of food (run ~)			famine (suffer ~)												to run short of food; to suffer famine		< neqa-(ng)isag-				neqangisag-	neqangisag-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 -\
neqangugh-	ys2f3e4-	think of 		igaghyalleghqaqa neqangughluku qavaghyaghtughtunga \'91I remembered that I would have to go to school (the next day), so I went [home] to get some sleep\'92; igaghyami liitkanka neqangughanka \'91I remembered what I learned in school\'92	remember												to think of; to remember		< neqagh-?-		CK A & W 63 CK 		neqangugh-	neqangugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
neqekrak	ys2srifr	bread		
\f2\i a Gambell word	
\f0\i0 pilot bread	cracker											bread; pilot bread; cracker		< neqa-krak				neqekrak	neqekrak	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
neqekrangllaasiq	ys2srif3k]9cb2	breadpan			pan for baking bread												breadpan		< neqekrangllagh-(u)siq				neqekrangllasiq	neqekrangllxsiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
neqekrangllagh-	ys2srif3k]z4-	bake bread			make fried break												to bake bread; to make fried bread		< neqekrak-ngllagh-				neqekrangllagh-	neqekrangllagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
neqekrangllaq	ys2srif3k]z2	fried bread															fried bread						neqekrangllaq	neqekrangllaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
neqekrangllaqaq	ys2srif3k]z2f2	loaf of bread															loaf of bread						neqekrangllaqaq	neqekrangllaqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
neqelghutaq	ys2sk4enf2	cache			storage place for food												cache; storage place for food		< neqa-lghutaq				neqelghutaq	neqelghutaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
neqelluk	ys2sk]/r	old food			food, old												old food		< neqa-lluk				neqelluk	neqelluk	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \

\f1\b neqenghaghqa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ys2sy4f52f\super s	\nosupersub feast															feast						neqenghaghqae	neqenghaghqae	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1099 \
neqenghaghqe-	ys2sy4f52s-	feast (hold a ~)															to hold a feast		< neqa-?-				neqenghaghqe-	neqenghaghqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
neqengyu-	ys2s3m/-	hunter (be a good ~)															to be a good hunter		< neqa-nge-yu-				neqengyu-	neqengyu-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 -\
neqengyuqaq	ys2s3m/2f2	hunter (good ~)															good hunter		< neqa-nge-yuqaq				neqengyuqaq	neqengyuqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
neqesghaq	ys2sc5f2	bait for a trap															bait for a trap		< neqa-?-				neqesghaq	neqesghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
neqesupa	ys2sc/gf	glutton		
\f2\i slang													
\f0\i0 glutton		< neqa-?-				neqesupa	neqesupa	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1072 \
neqete-	ys2sns-	catch fish or game		Kaalluninguq, "Kii nutaan repall 
\f2\i neqetuten
\f0\i0 \'94 "Aa, nutaan repall 
\f2\i neqetunga
\f0\i0 ." \'91After he arrived, [she said to him], \'93This is the first time in ages you\'92ve 
\f2\i gotten something to eat
\f0\i0 , isn\'92t it?\'94 \'93Yes, this is the first time in a long time I\'92ve 
\f2\i gotten food
\f0\i0 .\'94\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:268); neqennaqa \'91one who is going to catch fish or game\'92	obtain food												to catch fish or game; to obtain food		< neqa\super e\nosupersub -te-\super 2				\nosupersub neqete-	neqete-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
neqiinagh-	ys27yf5-	eat without further ado		neqiinaghtuq \'91he went right over and ate\'92													to eat without further ado		< negh<e>-(ng)inagh-				neqinagh-	neqxnagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 -\
neqinquq	ys2by2e2	depression in the grouned		Awiim neqinquq sangwaa, sengnguqayuk. \'91Probably it was some sort of depression in the ground where water comes up.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:4)	valley												depression in the ground; valley						neqinquq	neqinquq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
neqligh-	ys2k]b4-	poison		neqlighaa \'91he poisoned it\'92 /													to poison		< neqa-ligh-				neqligh-	neqligh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
neqlightugh-	ys2k]b5ne4-	offer food		neqlightughtuq \'91he offer food\'92; neqlightughaa \'91he offer food to her\'92 /													to offer food		< neqa-ligh-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				neqlightugh-	neqlightugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
neqngwaaq	ys23162	sweets		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 sweets		< neqa-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK Rub 389		neqngwaq	neqngwxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
neqnigh-	ys2y]b4-	tasty (be ~)															to be tasty		< neqa-nigh-				neqnigh-	neqnigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
neqnighsaan	ys2y]b5c9y	spice			seasoning												spice; seasoning		< neqnigh-sagh-(u)n				neqnighsan	neqnighsxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \
neqnighsaasiq	ys2y]b5c9cb2	perfume															perfume		< neqnigh-sagh-(u)siq				neqnighsasiq	neqnighsxsiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
neqniilliqe-	ys2y]7k]b2s-	enjoy (not ~ eating)															to not enjoy eating		< neqniite-lliqe-				neqnilliqe-	neqnxlliqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
neqniite-	ys2y]7ns-	tasty (not be ~)															to not be tasty		< neqnigh-(ng)ite-				neqnite-	neqnxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
neqniqe-	ys2y]b2s-	tasty (find ~)			find tasty												to find tasty		< neqnigh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				neqniqe-	neqniqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
netuughnagh-	ysn84yf4-	frustrating (be ~)		netuughnaghhalek qepghaghyaghqanka ukut neqet kumlaaghqengngaaghllaget, naten piqeghllani neghyaghtuutgagilgata \'91oh how frustrating it is to work with this frozen meat, and how will I ever get done before dinner!\'92	discouraging (be ~)												to be frustrating or discouraging		< ?-nagh-				netughnagh-	netxghnagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1090 \u1263 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
netuughnaq	ysn84yf2	discouraging situation			frustrating situation												discouraging situation; frustrating situation		< ?-naq				netughnaq	netxghnaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1090 \u1263 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
netuughniqe-	ysn84yb2s-	discouraged (feel ~)		netuughniquq \'91he feels discouraged or frustrated\'92 / netuughniqutkaa \'91he feels discouraged or frustrated over it\'92	frustrated (feel ~)												to feel discouraged or frustrated		< netuughnaq-liqe-				netughniqe-	netxghniqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1090 \u1263 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nevagh-	ysdf4-	lying on the back		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  nevaghtuq \'91he lay down on his back\'92; nevaghtaa \'91he laid it (or her) down on its (or her) back\'92; nevaghngaaq \'91he is lying on his back\'92; nevaghmi \'91lying on his back\'92; neghsaq nevaan qamughaa \'91he dragged the seal in such a way that it was on its back\'92; nevaghlluku nevaan aftaa \'91he put its back on the ground, on its back, and butchered it\'92; = nevegh-									shouldn\'92t it be \'91lying\'92? -CK- yes!!				lying on the back		PE n0v03-				nevagh-	nevagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nevagha-	ysdf4f-	sticky (be ~)		taghnughhaam iiggi nevaghaat candy-meng tugumiighluni \'91the child\'92s hands were sticky because he was holding a piece of candy\'92; nevuutkaq nevaghangakun makregtaa \'91he took off the one that was stuck from the  sticky part of it\'92													to be sticky				CK A & W 64		nevagha-	nevagha-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 -\
nevangquq	ysdf32e2	sinker for crabline		ayumiq iqaniighyat uyghagmeng nevangquqaqut; naayghamun nevangqughsiighyaghaqelghiit \'91in the old days, they used rocks for sinkers in crabbing; they would go to the mountain to get rocks to be used for sinkers\'92													sinker for crabline				CK A & W 64		nevangquq	nevangquq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
neve-	ysds-	stick (adhere)		nevaa \'91it is sticking to it\'92 / nevestaa \'91he stuck it onto something, glued it on\'92; nevnaghtuq \'91it is sticky\'92; qanigem atkuyaghqek nevaak \'91the snow is clinging to her clothes\'92; Sangyaghsagu nusugyaqegka, iqallugam 
\f2\i neveghllagumakanga
\f0\i0 . \'91When it (the accumulation) made it heavy, he pulled it (his tail)  out and tomcods were 
\f2\i clinging
\f0\i0  to it in a major way.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 64); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  neftegte-, nefsukaghlleq, nepneqagh-	cling	adhere											to stick; to cling; to adhere		PE n0v0-				neve-	neve-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
nevegh-	ysds4-	lying on the back		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  neveghtuq \'91he lay down on his back\'92; neveghtaa \'91he laid it (or her) down on its (or her) back\'92; neveghngaaq \'91he is lying on his back\'92; neveghmi \'91lying on his back\'92; neveghlluku nevaan aftaa \'91he put its back on the ground, on its back, and butchered it\'92; = nevagh-									shouldn\'92t it be \'91lying\'92? -CK- yes!!				lying on the back		PE n0v03-				nevegh-	nevegh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 -\
nevesqaghneq	ysdsc2f4ys2	ice (chunk of ~ or floe loosely adhering to edge of sea ice floe or field)		
\f2\i see item 37 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	floe loosely adhering to edge of sea ice floe or field	sea ice type											chunk of ice or floe loosely adhering to edge of sea ice floe or field		< neve-?-neq\super 2				\nosupersub nevesqaghneq	nevesqaghneq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
nevestaasiq	ysdscn6cb2	glue															glue		< neve-(te)ste-?-(u)siq				nevestasiq	nevestxsiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
nevestaq	ysdscnf2	rock sucker		
\f2\i species identification undetermined	
\f0\i0 sucker (rock ~)												rock sucker (fish)				SLI Cur. Man. 53		nevestaq	nevestaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
neveyeghnite-	ysdsqs4ybns-	sticky (be ~)		neveyeghnituq \'91it is sticky or gummy\'92 /	gummy (be ~)												to be sticky; to be gummy		< neve-?-				neveyeghnite-	neveyeghnite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
neviin, neviita	ysd7y. ysdbnf	device for freeing a frozen-in hook		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 neviitet,
\f2\i  for one such device	
\f0\i0 hook freer												device for freeing a frozen-in hook		< neve-?-(n)n				nevin, nevita	nevxn, nevxta	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1251 \u1085 , \u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \
neviitaq	ysd7nf2	sod-pick			pick (sod ~)												sod-pick		< nevuq-?-(u)taq				nevitaq	nevxtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b nevligh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ysdkb4-\'a1	notch		nevlighaa \'91he notched it\'92 / nevlightughaa \'91he notched it all around\'92													to notch						nevligh-1	nevligh-1	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub nevligh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ysdkb4-\'99	return to a certain way of doing things															to return to a certain way of doing things						nevligh-2	nevligh-2	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub nevngig-	ysd3bu-	stick easily on something		nevestaasit nevngipigtut \'91the glue sticks on easily\'92; mesiighneghakun amiiram nguuyngaaghaq nevuuquuteghllagumalghii, qayughllak nengigtuq \'91flies have stuck on to the oily part of the sealskin, because it is sticky\'92	sticky (be ~)												to easily stick on something; to be sticky		< neve-?		CK A & W 64		nevngig-	nevngig-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1187 \u1080 \u1075 -\
nevughtaq	ysde5nf2	sod block lower wall of the traditional dome-shaped house															sod block lower wall of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< nevuq-taq\super 1				\nosupersub nevughtaq	nevughtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nevuq	ysde2	sod			lump of sod												sod; lump of soil		PE n0v9u3 or 0v9u3				nevuq	nevuq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1091 \u1179 \
Nevuuqaq	Ysd82f2	Naukan in Chukotka (north of (Central Siberian) Yupik area) 		
\f2\i village in Siberia speaking another variety of Yupik linguistically more or less midway between Central Siberian Yupik (as spoken on St. Lawrence Island and at Sireniki and New Chaplino) and Central Alaskan Yup'ik
\f0\i0 ; Nevuuqaghhmiit \'91the people of Naukan\'92	East Cape in Chukotka (north of (Central Siberian) Yupik area) 												Naukan; East Cape in Chukotka (north of (Central Siberian) Yupik area) 						Nevuqaq	Nevxqaq	\uc0\u1053 \u1099 \u1074 \u1263 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
nevuute-	ysd8ns-	stick to something		nevuutuq \'91it got stuck to something\'92; nevuutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  got stuck together\'92	stick to each other												to stick to something; to stick to each other		< neve-ugh-(u)te-				nevute-	nevxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nevyaghaq	ysdmz4f2	baleen strip used for fishing line		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 baleen strip used for fishing line		< neve-yaghaq (?)		CK Rub 382		nevyaghaq	nevyaghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1074 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ngaalgeliigteng	36kusk7uns3	anywhere		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle;
\f0\i0  ellnga ngaalgeligteng igleghtaquq \'91he is going just anywhere\'92; kaviipik ngaalgeligteng igleghsimaaq \'91the red fox went in every which direction\'92	everywhere	back and forth											anywhere; everywhere; back an forth	ult gjgfkj\\ dtplt	from Chukchi &al!0l \'91on both sides\'92		CK Rub. 397; gloss 3 from Tanko		ngalgeligteng	ngxlgelxgteng	\uc0\u1187 \u257 \u1083 \u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1251 \u1075 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \
ngaayuun	360y	jammed ice (condition wherein floes crowd densely together making boat passage difficult and dangerous)		
\f2\i see item 38 in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												condition wherein floes crowd densely together making boat passage difficult and dangerous						ngayun	ngxyxn	\uc0\u1187 \u257 \u1102 \u772 \u1085 \
ngaayuute-	360ns-	blocked by chunks of floating sea ice (be ~)															to be blocked by chunks of floating sea ice				VK\'92s dict. revs.		ngayute-	ngxyxte-	\uc0\u1187 \u257 \u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ngawaq	3f1f2	you know		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle;
\f0\i0  ngawaq liisimaksaqevnga taginaanghilnguunga \'91after all, you already knew that I wasn\'92t going to come\'92													you know; after all		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub. 397		ngawaq	ngawaq	\uc0\u1187 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
ngayawell	3fz1sk]	herd 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 flock												herd; flock		from Chukchi &elw0l \'91herd, flock\'92		CK Rub 397		ngayawell	ngayawell	\uc0\u1187 \u1072 \u1103 \u1265 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \

\f1\b ngelqaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 3sk]2f2\'a1	pelagic cormorant			cormorant, pelagic	
\f2\i Phalacrocorax pelagicus											
\f0\i0 pelagic cormorant
\f2\i  (Phalacrocorax pelagicus)						
\f0\i0 ngelqaq1	ngelqaq1	\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b Ngelqaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub #sk]2f2\'99	Eskimo, mainland Alaskan		
\f2\i this word is used with this meaning in legends and may be connected with the meaning, 
\f0\i0 "cormorant"													mainland Alaskan Eskimo						Ngelqaq2	Ngelqaq2	\uc0\u1186 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 2\
ngepeghte-	3sgs5ns-	go directly to a place without stopping		Uuyneghmeng Qayiilleghnun piyugmeng ngepeghtaghput \'91we walked from Uuyneq directly to Qayiilleq without stopping\'92; ngepeghsaghaq taakepigtuq \'91the journey without stopping is really long\'92													to go directly to a place without stopping				CK A & W 64		ngepeghte-	ngepeghte-	\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ngepghute-	3sg5ens-	surface (of whales)		ngepghunnanightuq \'91it doesn\'92t come to the surface anymore\'92													to surface (of whales)				VK\'92s dict. revs.		ngepghute-	ngepghute-	\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1087 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ngepsighaq	3sgcb4f2	nose (septum of ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 ngepsighak,
\f2\i  for one septum	
\f0\i0 septum of nose												septum of nose	yjccjdfz gthtujhjltf			CK Rub. 399		ngepsighaq	ngepsighaq	\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ngetaq	3snf2	majority		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 majority	,jkmibycndj			CK Rub.  399		ngetaq	ngetaq	\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ngevrangilnguq*	3sdhf3bk3e2	sloppy person			slovenly person												sloppy person; slovenly person	ythziktdsq			CK V & E 130 CK may have heard this		ngevrangilnguq*	ngevrangilnguq*	\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
ngevreghagte-	3sdhs4f[ns-	smooth (be ~)		Piyaqminigu kaay, tagneqgalek qallevagkek 
\f2\i ngevreghagllutek
\f0\i0 . \'91When she did that [turned] toward it, there was a person with dark 
\f2\i shiny
\f0\i0  coveralls.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:248); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 ngevreghsaasiq, ngevrangilnguq	shiney (be ~)												to be smooth and shiny						ngevreghagte-	ngevreghagte-	\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ngevreghsaasiq	3sdhs5c9cb2	shoe brush		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E); used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 ngevreghsaasit,
\f2\i  for one brush	
\f0\i0 brush for shoes												shoe brush	cfgj;yfz otnrf	< ngevregh(agte)-sagh-(u)siq		CK V & E 82		ngevreghsasiq	ngevreghsxsiq	\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ngevyeg-	3sdqsu-	pinch with fingernails		ngevyegaa \'91he scratched her\'92 /	scratch with fingernails												to pinch or scratch with fingernails						ngevyeg-	ngevyeg-	\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1074 \u1253 \u1099 \u1075 -\
ngevzin	3sdpby	shorefast ice (smooth-surfaced ~, good for traveling over		
\f2\i see item 39 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type	smooth-surfaced shorefast ice, good for traveling over											smooth-surfaced shorefast ice, good for traveling over						ngevzin	ngevzin	\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1074 \u1079 \u1080 \u1085 \
ngiiggun, ngiiggutaq	37[ey. 37[enf2	weight put on top of something to hold it in place															weight put on top of something to hold it in place		< ngiigte-(u)n, ngiigte-(u)taq 				ngiggun, ngiggutaq	ngxggun, ngxggutaq	\uc0\u1187 \u1251 \u1093 \u1091 \u1085 , \u1187 \u1251 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ngiigte-	37[ns-	put weight (including part one\'92s body) on something to hold it in place		ngiigtaa \'91he put weight on it\'92 /	weight (put ~ (including part one\'92s body) on something to hold it in place)												to put weight (including part one\'92s body) on something to hold it in place		PY-S 0&i!-				ngigte-	ngxgte-	\uc0\u1187 \u1251 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Ngiigtekaq	#7[nsrf2	site on the coast east of Gambell		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on the coast east of Gambell						Ngigtekaq	Ngxgtekaq	\uc0\u1186 \u1251 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
ngiikaq, ngiikaaq	37rf2. #7r62	northern pintail			pintail, northern	
\f2\i Anas acuta											
\f0\i0 northern pintail 
\f2\i (Anas acuta)		
\f0\i0 PE i&(0)yuka3				ngikaq, ngikaq	ngxkaq, ngxkxq	\uc0\u1187 \u1251 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 , \u1186 \u1251 \u1082 \u257 \u1179 \
ngiillginagh-	37k][byf4-	want to go somewhere or do something but be unable to because doing something else		Sivungaghqaallghiinun ngiillginaghtuq \'91he really would have wanted to go with the others to Savoonga\'92; laalighsughngaaghmi qayughllak pili legan ngiillginaghluni kivaaghtuq \'91although he wanted to visit, he couldn\'92t and his desire to do so lessened\'92													to want to go somewhere or do something but be unable to because doing something else				CK A & W 64		ngillginagh-	ngxllginagh-	\uc0\u1187 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ngiiqe-	372s-	bend over from carrying a heavy load, due to head wind, or due to dragging something by a rope stretching back over the shoulder: 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to bend over from carrying a heavy load, due to head wind, or due to dragging something by a rope stretching back over the shoulder				Rub 398		ngiqe-	ngxqe-	\uc0\u1187 \u1251 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ngillegte-	3bk]s[ns-	moan		ngillegtuq \'91he is moaning and groaning\'92 / aqnighneghan ngillegtestaa unulqusiq \'91his ailment made him moan all night\'92	groan												to moan; to groan						ngillegte-	ngillegte-	\uc0\u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ngilvil	3bkdbk	herd		
\f2\i probably more a Chukchi word used in Chukotkan Yupik than a Yupik word from Chukchi	
\f0\i0 flock								check exact pronunciation, spelling				herd; flock		from Chukchi &elw0l \'91herd, flock\'92	14	deR. 353		ngilvil	ngilvil	\uc0\u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \
nguleghte-	3eks5ns-	stretch (particularly a boot sole) with a stretching stick		nguleghtaa \'91he is stretching it\'92 /													to stretch (particularly a boot sole) with a stretching stick		PY n0&ul03- (under PE n0&0-)				nguleghte-	nguleghte-	\uc0\u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ngurngighuq	3eh3b4e2	sister-in-law (woman\'92s husband\'92s brother\'92s wife)															woman's husband's brother's wife (sister-in-law in this one limited sense)						ngurngighuq	ngurngighuq	\uc0\u1187 \u1091 \u1088 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 \
Ngusighmii(t)	#ecb4vb\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< Ngusiq (Ngusiik)-mii		CK	xxxt	Ngusighmi(t)	Ngusighmx(t)	\u1186 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 (\u1090 )\
Ngusiik	#ec7r	Boxer Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Boxer Bay on St. Lawrence Is.						Ngusik	Ngusxk	\uc0\u1186 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1082 \
nguug-	38u-	eat meat clinging to a bone (said of an animal)		nguugtuq \'91it is eating the meat from a bone\'92; nguugaa \'91it is eating the meat from it\'92 /													to eat meat clinging to a bone (said of an animal)						ngug-	ngxg-	\uc0\u1187 \u1263 \u1075 -\
nguugraq	38uhf2	whale flesh															whale flesh		< nguug-?				ngugraq	ngxgraq	\uc0\u1187 \u1263 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
nguulghun	38k4ey	stick for stretching boot soles			crosspole in the traditional dome-shaped house								
\f2\i see Parts of Traditional House in Appendix				
\f0\i0 stick for stretching boot soles; crosspole in the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< nguleghte-(u)n				ngulghun	ngxlghun	\uc0\u1187 \u1263 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
nguutnguk	38n3]er	wart															wart		PE ut&u3				ngutnguk	ngxtnguk	\uc0\u1187 \u1263 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1082 \
nguuyngaaghaq*	38q364f2	housefly		Iimnanguq.  Kiyaghsimalghii 
\f2\i nguuyngaaghaq
\f0\i0 , umiilgat paallghunkut, qetgeghyaankut, apayepayiighenkut, melnguunkut. \'91Once upon a time there was a 
\f2\i housefly
\f0\i0  who was the king of the mites, the  water striders, the spiders, and the beetles.\'92 (SULUWET 32); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 gerungawa \'91yellow meat fly\'92													housefly		from Chukchi !03\'92o&aw0t \'91fly\'92	03, 14 ?			nguyngaghaq*	ngxyngxghaq*	\uc0\u1187 \u1263 \u1253 \u1187 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nighug-	yb4eu-	bright (light) (be ~)		nighugtuq \'91it is bright\'92 / nighugluku \'91while it is daylight\'92	daylight (be ~)												to be bright (light); to be daylight		PY-S n03$u!-				nighug-	nighug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1075 -\
nighugpagte-	yb4e[gf[ns-	twinkle		nighugpagtuq \'91it is twinkling\'92 / 													to twinkle		< nighug-pagte-				nighugpagte-	nighugpagte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nighugtaghagh-	yb4e[nf4f4-	dawn comes															for dawn to come		< nighugte-?-				nighugtaghagh-	nighugtaghagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nighugte-	yb4e[ns-	bright (become ~)		nighugtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nighugtaa \'91it became bright\'92 /													to become bright		< nighug-?-				nighugte-	nighugte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nighugyug-	yb4eum/u-	bright light (get ~ in one\'92s eyes)															to get bright light in one's eyes		< nighug-yug-				nighugyug-	nighugyug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
nighugyuk	yb4eum/r	yellow color															yellow color		< nighug-yug-				nighugyuk	nighugyuk	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
nighuk	yb4er	light (brightness)		Taana 
\f2\i nighuk
\f0\i0  kuukgutnguuq mamlegmi, \'85 \'91That 
\f2\i light
\f0\i0  shown in the darkness, \'85\'92 (John 1.5)	brightness	radiance											light; brightness; radiance		PY-S n03$u!-				nighuk	nighuk	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \
nighupagite-	yb4egfubns-	dim (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 dull (be ~)								check length of second i -- given as nighupagiilnguq				to be dim or dull	necrksq	< nighug-pagite-		Rub. 371		nighupagite-	nighupagite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nighwaagpagtagh-	yb416[gf[nf4-	glitter		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nighug-													to glitter				Kallag. 100		nighwagpagtagh-	nighwxgpagtagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nighwaagrag-	yb416uhfu-	transparent (be ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nighug-													to be transparent						nighwagrag-	nighwxgrag-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1075 -\
nighwaagrak	yb416uhfr	glass		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nighug-													glass						nighwagrak	nighwxgrak	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
niigh-	y74-	place sticks side by side as when making an elevated rack		qeghat niighluki nefkuurateng qeghaasimakangit \'91they made a rack above their meat rack for the dried seal meat\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 niiq													to place sticks side by side as when making an elevated rack		PY-S ni(i)@a3-		CK A& W 65		nigh-	nxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
niighigh-	y74b4-	remove rope holding a skin to a drying frame (and thus remove the skin)		niighightuq \'91he removed the rope\'92 or \'91deboned a fish\'92; niighighaa \'91he is removing it\'92, \'91he is deboning it\'92 /	debone a fish												to remove rope holding a skin to a drying frame (and thus remove the skin); to debone a fish		< niiq-(ng)igh-				nighigh-	nxghigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
niighraan	y74h6y	rope, thin for weaving		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 thin rope for weaving		< niiq-?-(u)n		CK Rub 370		nighran	nxghrxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1085 \
niighraq	y74hf2	cage			gate												cage; gate		< niiq-?				nighraq	nxghraq	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
niighte-	y75ns-	crush		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 press	lean heavily on											to crush; to press; to lean heavily on	pflfdkbdfnm. ghbkfdkbdfnm. yfdfkbdfncz			CK V & E 190		nighte-	nxghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
niightugh-	y75ne4-	stretch a skin on a frame to dry it		niightughtuq \'91he stretched and lashed a skin for drying\'92; niightughaa \'91he stretched and lashed it to a frame\'92 /	lash a skin to a drying frame												to stretch and lash a skin to a frame for drying		< niiq-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				nightugh-	nxghtugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
niightuun	y75n8y	frame for drying sealskin		
\f2\i also 
\f0\i0 niightuun; 
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 niightuutek,
\f2\i  for one such frame													
\f0\i0 frame for drying for sealskin		< niightugh-(u)n				nightun	nxghtxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1263 \u1085 \
niighun	y74ey	crossbeam in ceiling of the the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , the inner room of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 crossbeam in ceiling of the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , the inner room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< niigh-(u)n		CK Rub 370		nighun	nxghun	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
niilleq	y7k]s2	frame, square and vertically positioned, for splitting and drying walrus hide		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  niillghek, 
\f2\i for one such frame													
\f0\i0 frame, square and vertically positioned, for splitting and drying walrus hide		PY-S ni(i)@a3-; < niiq-lleq				nilleq	nxlleq	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
niillghwaaq	y7k]5162	soda cracker		
\f2\i so called due to square shape similar to that of a drying frame 	
\f0\i0 cracker (soda ~)												soda cracker		< niilleq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				nillghwaq	nxllghwxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
niilquta	y7k]2enf	rope used to fasten skin onto drying frame		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 niilqutet,
\f2\i  for one rope													
\f0\i0 rope used to fasten skin onto drying frame				CK Rub 371		nilquta	nxlquta	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
niinghute-	y7y4ens-	surface and then resubmerge		niinghutuq \'91it repeatedly surfaced and resubmerged\'92 / aghveghllak niinghutagha taaga naghughtuq \'91the big whale passed by, surfacing and resubmerging\'92; naghughtut niinghutaghamegteggun \'91the boat passed by coming up through rough waves\'92; iingtameng malighqulghii kaasaghtughluku niinghutfikaa \'91he was chasing the molted bird, and as he was getting close enough, he leaped onto it\'92	plunge into something												to surface and then resubmerge (of sea animal or boat in rough water); to plunge into something				2nd gloss from A & W 65		ninghute-	nxnghute-	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
niiq	y72	rod added on drying rack for additional used such as hanging meat		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 niin, niita													rod added on drying rack for additional used such as hanging meat		PY-S ni(i)@a3-				niq	nxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1179 \
niita, niin	y7nf. y7y	lashing of baby walrus hide holding skin to boat frame		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 niitet
\f2\i , or dual, 
\f0\i0 niitek
\f2\i , for one such rack; cf. 
\f0\i0 niiq	rack hanging from ceiling of house used for drying clothes or storage												lashing of baby walrus hide holding skin to boat frame; rack hanging from ceiling of house used for drying clothes or storage                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   						nita, nin	nxta, nxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 , \u1085 \u1251 \u1085 \
niite-	y7ns-	fishbone stuck in one's throat (have a ~)		niituq \'91he has a fishbone stuck in his throat\'92 /													to have a fishbone stuck in one's throat						nite-	nxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
niive-	y7ds-	transfer from one container to another		niivuq \'91she gave birth\'92; niivaa \'91he poured, transferred  it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nivugh-	pour	give birth											to transfer from one container to another; to pour; to give birth		PE na(C)0v0(t)-				nive-	nxve-	\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1074 \u1099 -\
nikim, nikimqun	ybrbv. ybrbv2ey	as if		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  nikimqun yuglluggaanaluni aanaqelghii \'91just like a regular person he goes out all the time\'92; Elngaatall quyakiinkut qiipaghaghqameng aqelqalget tamaakut aagrateng pinighsaghwaaghumakangit, 
\f2\i nikimqun
\f0\i0  laluramkeghllaget kaannaqut. \'91The ones expecting guests were very happy to see us and had beautified their inner living rooms with cloth 
\f2\i just as if
\f0\i0  lots of white people were going to arrive.\'92 (PANGEGH. 59)	just because												as if; just because		from Chukchi nekem \'91especially; well, alright\'92				nikim, nikimqun	nikim, nikimqun	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1084 , \u1085 \u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1084 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
nipallagh-	ybgfk]z4-	offended (be ~ (as from being left out))		nipallaghtuq \'91he feels hurt, left out\'92 / nipallaataa \'91he is offended for her sake\'92, \'91he feels sad because she was left out\'92; nipallaatkaa \'91he feels offended over it\'92	left out (feel ~)	hurt emotionally (be ~)											to be offended (as from being left out); to feel left out; to be emotionally hurt		PY-S nipa@a-				nipallagh-	nipallagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
nipallaqe-	ybgfk]z2s-	offended by (it) (be ~)		nipallaqaa \'91he is hurt by it\'92 /	hurt emotionally by (it) (be ~)												to be offended or emotionally hurt by (it)		< nipallagh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				nipallaqe-	nipallaqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nipalliqe-	ybgfk]b2s-	feel left out															to feel left out		< nipallagh-lliqe- (?)				nipalliqe-	nipalliqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nisku	ybcre	kerosene heater		= nesku													kerosene heater		from a brand-name		CK Nagai (as nesku), SLI Cir. Res. Man. 160		nisku	nisku	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1089 \u1082 \u1091 \
nivugh-	ybde4-	pour into another container		nivughtuq \'91he poured something\'92; nivughaa \'91he poured it\'92 / < niive-ugh- (
\f2\i the short
\f0\i0  i 
\f2\i in the derived form, 
\f0\i0 nivugh-,
\f2\i  is due to analogy with pairs such as
\f0\i0  kuuve- / kuvugh- 
\f2\i where the short
\f0\i0  u 
\f2\i in the first syllable of the derived word
\f0\i0  
\f2\i reflects a short vowel in the protoform as still in Central Alaskan Yup'ik
\f0\i0  kuve-
\f2\i , as if the protoform for 
\f0\i0 niive-
\f2\i had a short 
\f0\i0 i, 
\f2\i which is not the case given that the Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik cognate to 
\f0\i0 niive- 
\f2\i is
\f0\i0  naive-, 
\f2\i and not 
\f0\i0 *nive-)													to pour into another container		< niive-ugh-				nivugh-	nivugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nuge-	yeus-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > nuug-, nugyaghaq, nungyaghaq															PE nu!0-				nuge-	nuge-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 -\
nughaghqaq	ye4f52f2	reindeer calf			skin of reindeer calf								check				reindeer calf; skin of reindeer calf	gs;br	< nughaq-?		CK V & E 92, CK		nughaghqaq	nughaghqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
nughaq	ye4f2	caribou calf			reindeer calf	calf of caribou or reindeer											caribou or reindeer calf		PE nu33a3				nughaq	nughaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nughhaq	ye5f2	niece of a woman through her sister			nephew of a woman through her sister												woman's sister's child; niece or nephew of a woman through her sister		PE nu3a3(a3)				nughhaq	nughhaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
nughllu	ye5k]/	seal breathing hole in ice		nughllunganilluku unangumalghii \'91he caught the seal at its breathing hole\'92													seal breathing hole in ice				CK A & E 65 Rub 381		nughllu	nughllu	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
nughtughaq	ye5ne4f2	fish (small shiny ~ type)		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; 
\f0\i0 = lughtughaq	\'93delta\'94 smelt	smelt (\'93delta\'94 ~)							called \'93delta smelt\'94 in SLI Cur. Man. 54				small shiny fish type; \'93delta\'94 smelt						nughtughaq	nughtughaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nughtuqite-	ye5ne2bns-	deterred from doing what one had intended (be ~)															to be deterred from doing what one had intended						nughtuqite-	nughtuqite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nugiiq	yeu72	kayak harpoon		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E)	
\f0\i0 harpoon for use with kayak												kayak harpoon	ufhgey rfzrf			CK V & E  106; Rub 374		nugiq	nugxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1075 \u1251 \u1179 \
nugru	yeuhe	loop		= nurgu	noose												loop; noose		PE n0!u3lu3				nugru	nugru	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \
nugru-	yeuhe-	loop (put a ~ in something)		nugruuq \'91he's putting a loop in something\'92; nugraa \'91he's putting a loop in it\'92 / = nurgu-													to put a loop in something						nugru-	nugru-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 -\
nugyaghaq	yeumz4f2	entryway to tunnel of semisubterranean house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  = nungyaghaq; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nuug-													entryway to tunnel (
\f2\i saaygu
\f0\i0 ) of semisubterranean house (
\f2\i nenglu
\f0\i0 )		PY nu!ya3aq (under PE nu!0-); < nuge-yaghaq		CK Rub 374		nugyaghaq	nugyaghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nukaghaq	yerf4f2	wife (second ~ in polygamous marriage)															second wife in a polygamous marriage		PE nuka3a3 (under PE nuka3)				nukaghaq	nukaghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nukalpigaq	yerfk]gbuf2	young man			man, young												young man		PE nukalpi!a3				nukalpigaq	nukalpigaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
nukaq	yerf2	stone or iron scraper		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)	
\f0\i0 iron or stone  scraper	scraper of stone or iron											stone or iron scraper	rfvtyysq bkb ;tktpsq crht,jr			CK V & E 83; Rub 375		nukaq	nukaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
nukeggnagh-	yers[y]f4-	dirty (cause one to get ~)		nukeggnaghtuq \'91it gets one dirty\'92 /													to cause one to get dirty						nukeggnagh-	nukeggnagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nukeggnaghqe-	yers[y]f52s-	dirty (get ~)		nukeggnaghquq \'91he got dirty\'92; nukeggnaghqaa \'91he got it dirty\'92 /													to get dirty		< nukeggnaq-ghqe\super 2\nosupersub -				nukeggnaghqe-	nukeggnaghqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nukeggnaq	yers[y]f2	dirt			filth												dirt; filth		< nukegte-naq				nukeggnaq	nukeggnaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \
nukeggniigh-	yers[y]74-	clean (remove dirt)		nukeggniightuq \'91he cleaned himself or cleaned up his surroundings\'92; nukeggniighaa \'91he cleaned it \'92 /													to clean		< nukeggnaq-(ng)igh-				nukeggnigh-	nukeggnxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nukegsuketaq	yers[c/rsnf2	person who abhors dirty work															person who abhors dirty work		< nukegte-sug-ketagh-				nukegsuketaq	nukegsuketaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nukegte-	yers[ns-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > nukeggnaq, nukegsuketaq																			nukegte-	nukegte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nula-	yekz-	multiply		nulaaq \'91it increased\'92 / qikmii nulaat \'91his dogs multiplied\'92	increase in number or size												to multiply; to increase in number or size						nula-	nula-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 -\
nulgiigh-, nulngiigh-	yeku74-. yek374-	relax facial muscles		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nulgiite-	expressionless (become ~)	stony-faced (become ~)											to relax facial muscles; to become expressionless; to become stony-faced		PY nul!a3i3-; < ?-(ng)igh-				nulgigh-, nulngigh-	nulgxgh-, nulngxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1075 \u1251 \u1271 -, \u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1187 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nulgiite-, nulngiite-	yeku7ns-. yek37ns-	stony-faced (be ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nulgiigh-	expressionless (be ~)												to be stony-faced; be expressionless		PY nul!a3i3-; < ?-(ng)ite-; 				nulgite-, nulngite-	nulgxte-, nulngxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1075 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -, \u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nulighh-	yekb5-	wife		
\f2\i must be used with postbase or possessed ending;
\f0\i0  nulighhituq \'91he doesn't have a wife\'92; nulighqa \'91my wife\'92; nulighha \'91his wife\'92; nulighhen \'91your wife\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nuliiq													wife		PE nuli3(a3)				nulighh-	nulighh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 -\
nulighhighaq	yekb5b4f2	widower															widower		PE nuli3(a3)i3- (under PE nuli3(a3)); < nulighh-(ng)igh-aq				nulighhighaq	nulighhighaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nulighhwaaq	yekb5162	exchange wife			wife (exchange ~)												exchange wife		< nulighh-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				nulighhwaq	nulighhwxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
nulighqalgun	yekb52fkuey	brother-in-law
\f2\i  (in the sense of man\'92s wife\'92s sister\'92s husband)		
\f0\i0 = nuliingqalgun									where is this from? is it correct?				man's wife's sister's husband; brother-in-law
\f2\i  (in this one limited sense)		
\f0\i0 < nulighh-?-lgun				nulighqalgun	nulighqalgun	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
nulighqullghiik	yekb52ek]57r	man and wife			married couple	couple, married											man and wife; married couple.		< nulighh-ke\super 1\nosupersub -(u)te-lghii-
\f2\i dual; 
\f0\i0 PY nuli(3)aq0l3iik (under PE nuli3(a3))				nulighqullghik	nulighqullghxk	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1251 \u1082 \
nulightugh-	yekb5ne4-	get a wife		nulightughtuq \'91he got married\'92 /	married (get ~ (of a man))	wife (get a ~)											to get a wife; to get married (of a man)		< nuligh-?-; PY-S nuli3(a3)tu3- (under PE nuli3(a3))				nulightugh-	nulightugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nuliighqaq	yek752f2	wife-to-be															wife-to-be		< nuliiq-kaq				nulighqaq	nulxghqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
nuliingqalgun	yek732fkuey	brother-in-law
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 (man\'92s wife\'92s sister\'92s husband)		= nulighqalgun													man's wife's sister's husband; brother-in-law 
\f2\i (in this one limited sense)		
\f0\i0 < nuliiq-?-lgun				nulingqalgun	nulxngqalgun	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
nuliiq 	yek72	wife		nuliigha \'91his wife\'92; niliighen \'91your wife\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nulighh-													wife		PE nuli3(a3)				nuliq 	nulxq 	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1179 \
nullu	yek]/	rump			buttock	upper part of hill or mountain											rump; buttock; upper part of hill or mountain		PE nu@u(3)				nullu	nullu	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
nulqaviigh-	yek]2fd74-	difficult time (have a ~)		nulqaviightuq \'91he's having a difficult time\'92 / nulqaviighutkaa \'91he's having a difficult time with it\'92; Tamaaken apalluqluku ungipaatamsi, 
\f2\i nulqaviighutkegpenaan
\f0\i0  ungvalleghsi, \'85. \'91Therefore I say unto you, do not 
\f2\i worry
\f0\i0  about your life, \'85.\'92 (Mattew  6.25)	worried (be ~)	discouraged (be ~)											to have a difficult time; to be worried or discouraged		PE nulqa3-				nulqavigh-	nulqavxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nulugh-	yek/4-	fish through the ice by jigging		nulughtuq \'91he ice-fished\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he dunked a teabag\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 tulughagh-	jig for fish	ice-fish								dunk tea bag up and down			to fish through the ice by jigging; to jig; to ice-fish; to dunk teabag up and down		PE nulu3(a3)-				nulugh-	nulugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 -\
nuluq	yek/2	ice-fishing gear			teabag												ice-fishing gear; teabag						nuluq	nuluq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1179 \
nuluusiq	yek8cb2	fishing rod and reel		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  nuluusit,
\f2\i  for one such outfit	
\f0\i0 jigging equipment												fishing rod and reel; jigging equipment		< nulugh-(u)siq				nulusiq	nulxsiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
nuna	yeyf	land		nunanga \'91his village\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  suna	village	place								ground or floor			land; village; place; ground; floor		PE nuna				nuna	nuna	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \
Nunaagek	Yey6usr	Stolbi Rocks off the northeast coast of St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices									
\f0\i0 Chris gives Nunaagek (twice); but Yupik Lore 2:112 has Nunaagak				Stolbi Rocks off the northeast coast of St. Lawrence Is.		< nuna-?				Nunagek	Nunxgek	\uc0\u1053 \u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1075 \u1099 \u1082 \
Nunaaghmii(t)	Yeyf4vb\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< nunaaq-mii		CK V & E 76	xxxt	Nunaghmi(t)	Nunxghmx(t)	\u1053 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 (\u1090 )\
nunaaq	yey62	camp		Enkaam llangaqa unangniiq teghigmun aghsaan ayuqaqelghii kiigmi iwemga ilangi 
\f2\i nunaaghmeggnun
\f0\i0  aglaghtuutaqelghiit kiyang unataanunllu. \'91And hunting sea mammals slowed down in the summer so some people would go to their 
\f2\i camps
\f0\i0  mostly to gather greens.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:140); Sighinek aangepiglleghhii 
\f2\i nunaaghat
\f0\i0  esnaghmiit. \'91Sirineki is the largest 
\f2\i city
\f0\i0  of the coastal people.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 152)	village	town								city			camp; village; town; city	kfuthm\\ ctktybt	< nuna-?-		... CK V & E 81		nunaq	nunxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
nunaghllak	yeyf5k]zr	world (the earth)			continent	city											world (the earth); continent; city		< nuna-ghllak				nunaghllak	nunaghllak	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
nunaki-	yeyfrb-	good time (have a ~)		nunakiiq \'91he's having a good time\'92 / nunakitkaa \'91he's having a good time on account of it\'92;  
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nuna	enjoy oneself	happy (be ~)											to have a good time; to enjoy oneself; to be happy		PY nunaki-				nunaki-	nunaki-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 -\
nunakingite-	yeyfrb3bns-	indisposed (be ~)			unable to enjoy things (be ~)												to be indisposed or otherwise unable to enjoy things		< nunaki-(ng)ite-				nunakingite-	nunakingite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Nunalek	Yeyfksr	Preobrazhenie Bay in Chukotka		= Nunegraq; 
\f2\i well to west of Yupik area in Chukotka; see Map 1 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Nunligran (village) in Chukotka												Preobrazhenie Bay and Nunligran (village) in Chukotka				CK and others		Nunalek	Nunalek	\uc0\u1053 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
nunalgun	yeyfkuey	fellow-countryman			neighbor												fellow-countryman; neighbor		< nuna-lgun				nunalgun	nunalgun	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
Nunangighaq	Yeyf3b4f2	Nuneangan Is. in Chukotka east of Yttygran Is. (Siqluk)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Nuneangan Is. in Chukotka east of Yttygran Is. (Siqluk)		< nuna-ngiighhaq				Nunangighaq	Nunangighaq	\uc0\u1053 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nunangiik	yeyf37r	codfish type		
\f2\i species identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 type of codfish				SLI Cur. Man. 53		nunangik	nunangxk	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1251 \u1082 \
nunangite-	yeyf3bns-	room (not have enough ~)															to not have enough room		< nuna-(ng)ite-				nunangite-	nunangite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nunanigh-	yeyfyb4-	enjoyable (be ~)		nunanightuq \'91it is enjoyable\'92 /													to be enjoyable		PE nunanni3-				nunanigh-	nunanigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
nunanighqe-	yeyfyb52s-	produce enjoyable music, stories, etc.		nunanighquq \'91he produced something enjoyable\'92 /													to produce enjoyable music, stories, etc.		< nunanigh-ghqe\super 3\nosupersub -				nunanighqe-	nunanighqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nunanipagite-	yeyfybgfubns-	enjoyable (be not very ~)															to be not very enjoyable		< nunanigh-ghpak-(ng)ite- (?)				nunanipagite-	nunanipagite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nunaniq	yeyfyb2	joy (cause of ~)			enjoyable thing (music, story, etc.)												cause of joy; enjoyable thing (music, story, etc.)						nunaniq	nunaniq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \
nunaniqe-	yeyfyb2s-	enjoyable (find (it) ~)															to find (it) enjoyable		< nunaniq-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				nunaniqe-	nunaniqe-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
nunapallaan	yeyfhfk]6y	thumping sound															thumping sound				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 158		nunapallan	nunapallxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1085 \
nunatu-	yeyfne-	roomy (be ~)			spacious (be ~)												to be roomy; to be spacious		< nuna-tu-				nunatu-	nunatu-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 -\
nunavak	yeyfdfr	walrus on ice		Tagitugmi qalghillghikun nagataqluki 
\f2\i nunavaget
\f0\i0  takwaaput. \'91We went over to the herd of 
\f2\i walrus on the ice
\f0\i0  by listening for the sounds they made in the fog.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 107)													walrus on ice		< nuna-? (?); PE nunava! or nunava3 (under PE nuna)				nunavak	nunavak	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
nunavalleq	yeyfdfk]s2	ice floe or field area frequented by walruses and stained by walrus feces		
\f2\i see item 40 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												area of ice floe or field frequented by walruses and stained by walrus feces		< nunavak-lleq				nunavalleq	nunavalleq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
nunavghugh-	yeyfd4e4-	camp (go ~ing by boat for an extended time)															to go camping by boat for an extended time		< nuna-?-		VK		nunavghugh-	nunavghugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1271 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nunavghuugh-	yeyfd414-	go to a camp		kiilqusiq nunavghuughluteng uksaaghumaan uteghnightut \'91they went to their camp and stayed there all summer, and as it was becoming fall, they came back\'92; uughqanun kiikun nunavghuuqumta pilghaaten \'91if we go to the camp down south next summer, you should come along\'92													to go to a camp		< nuna-?		CK A & W 66		nunavghugh-	nunavghxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1074 \u1271 \u1265 \u1271 -\
nungigh-	ye3b4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > nungighaghneq, nungighsiitet, nungighta, nungighte-															PY-S nu&i3t0-				nungigh-	nungigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
nungighaghneq	ye3b4f4ys2	drawstring tube on skin-boot															drawstring tube on skin-boot		< nungigh-?-neq\super 2				\nosupersub nungighaghneq	nungighaghneq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
nungighaghniisiq	ye3b4f4y7cb2	stitch type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 type of stitch				see SLI Cur. Res. Man. 85		nungighaghnisiq	nungighaghnxsiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
nungighsiitet	ye3b5c7nsn	stitches which form the tube for a drawstring around the top of a skin-boot															stitches which form the tube for a drawstring around the top of a skin-boot		< nunangigh-?-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 nungighsitet	nungighsxtet	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \
nungighta	ye3b5nf	drawstring															drawstring		< nungigh-(s)ta				nungighta	nungighta	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
nungighte-	ye3b5ns-	tie boot-top or other clothing with a drawstring		nungightuq \'91he tied his boot-top drawstring\'92; nungightaa \'91he tied it\'92 /  													to tie boot top or other clothing with a drawstring		< nungigh-?-				nungighte-	nungighte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nungyaghaq	ye4mz4f2	entryway to tunnel of semisubterranean house		Saaygumun taghnughhaat mayughalghiit yugem 
\f2\i nungyaghagneng
\f0\i0  nuugluni araamakangi, \'93Mayughaghpenasi!\'94 The man peeked out of the 
\f2\i underground house entry
\f0\i0  and said to the children who were climbing on top of the artic entry tunnel, \'93Don\'92t climb!\'94 (SULUWET  108); = nugyaghaq; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nuug-													entryway to tunnel (
\f2\i saaygu
\f0\i0 ) of semisubterranean house (
\f2\i nenglu
\f0\i0 )		< nuge-yaghaq; PYnu!ya3aq (under PE nu!0-)				nungyaghaq	nungyaghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nunii-	yey7-	sit very still and stare vacantly		teghtuneghmini wiin nuniigaqelghii sagpenani \'91when he gets up he doesn\'92t do anything at first but stares vacantly\'92; nuniinaqlataghtuten maketen \'91you are going to stare vacantly again, so get up now\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nanglii-	daydream in a trance like state												to sit very still and stare vacantly; to daydream in a trance like state				CK A & W 66		nuni-	nunx-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1251 -\
Nunivagem Angliviga	
\fs20 Yeybdfusv F3kbdbuf	
\fs24 August		
\f2\i literally:
\f0\i0  'time when the rosewort (or tundra vegetation) grows'													August					xxxa	Nunivagem Angliviga	Nunivagem Angliviga	\uc0\u1053 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1084  \u1040 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \
Nunivagem Palighviga	
\fs20 Yeybdfusv Gfkb4dbuf	
\fs24 August		
\f2\i literally:
\f0\i0  'time when the rosewort (or tundra vegetation) turns brown'	September												August; September		< nunivak-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + palighvik-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxp	Nunivagem Palighviga	Nunivagem Palighviga	\uc0\u1053 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1084  \u1055 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \
nunivagsaghuq	yeybdf[cz4e2	gull type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 type of gull		< nunivak-?-				nunivagsaghuq	nunivagsaghuq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 \
nunivagseghaq1	yeybdf[cs4f2\'a1	tundra vegetation			vegetation on tundra 												tundra vegetation		< nunivak-?-				nunivagseghaq1	nunivagseghaq1	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 1\
nunivagseghaq2	yeybdf[cs4f2\super \'99	\nosupersub bird type		
\f2\i identified as \'93bullfinch of passage\'94 for Chukotka and as \'93thayer\'92s gull\'94 for St. Lawrence Island, but neither the bullfinch (Pyrrhula pyrrhula) nor thayer\'92s gull (Larus thayeri) are found in the area													
\f0\i0 bird type	gthtktnysq cytubhm			Rub. 378		nunivagseghaq2	nunivagseghaq2	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 2\
nunivak	yeybdfr	rosewort		nunivagmeng neghtuq \'91she ate rosewort\'92; nunivagmi inghuuq \'91she picked berries in the tundra\'92; 
\f2\i also called \'93kings crown\'94 in local English	
\f0\i0 tundra	
\f2\i Rhodiola atropurpurea											
\f0\i0 rosewort 
\f2\i (Rhodiola atropurpurea)
\f0\i0 ; tundra		PE nuniva! (under PE nuna)				nunivak	nunivak	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
nunivi-	yeybdb-	gather greens		nuniviiq \'91he is gathering greens\'92; nunivii \'91he is gathering them\'92 /	greens (gather ~)												to gather greens		< nunivak-i\super 2\nosupersub -				nunivi-	nunivi-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 -\
Nunivivik	Yeybdbdbr	August		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time for gathering greens\'92; 
\f2\i also given in various sources as 
\f0\i0 June-July, July, 
\f2\i and 
\f0\i0 July-August													August		< nunivi-vik				Nunivivik	Nunivivik	\uc0\u1053 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
Nunlegran	Yeyksuhfy	Preobrazhenie Bay in Chukotka		= Nunlegraq, Nunalek; 
\f2\i well to west of Yupik area in Chukotka; see Map 1 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Nunligran (village) in Chukotka												Preobrazhenie Bay and Nunligran (village) in Chukotka				CK and others		Nunlegran	Nunlegran	\uc0\u1053 \u1091 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1085 \
Nunlegraq	Yeyksuhf2	Preobrazhenie Bay in Chukotka		= Nunlegran, Nunalek; 
\f2\i well to west of Yupik area in Chukotka; see Map 1 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Nunligran (village) in Chukotka												Preobrazhenie Bay and Nunligran (village) in Chukotka				CK and others		Nunlegraq	Nunlegraq	\uc0\u1053 \u1091 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
nunmaakw, nunmaak	yeyv6r1. yeyv6r	slowly		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0  nunmaawhaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nunmaaggaq \'91very slowly\'92													slowly		from Chukchi nunt0m\'92ev \'91quietly; reasonably\'92 (?)				nunmakw, nunmak	nunmxkw, nunmxk	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1084 \u257 \u1082 \u1265 , \u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1084 \u257 \u1082 \
nunmaaw-, nunmaag-	yeyv61-. yeyv6u-	slow (be ~)		nunmaawhtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nunmaagtuq \'91he is slow or sluggish\'92 / 
\f2\i the form with 
\f0\i0 w 
\f2\i is said to be the more conservative form	
\f0\i0 sluggish (be ~)												to be slow; to be sluggish		from Chukchi nunt0m\'92ev \'91quietly; reasonably\'92 (?)				nunmaw-, nunmag-	nunmxw-, nunmxg-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1084 \u257 \u1265 -, \u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1084 \u257 \u1075 -\
nunugh-	yeye4-	pinch		nunughaa \'91he pinched it\'92 or \'91he held it between his thumb and forefinger\'92 /	hold between thumb and finger(s)												to pinch; to hold between thumb and finger(s)		PE nunu(3)-				nunugh-	nunugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nunughtugh-	yeye5ne4-	choke		nunughtughaa \'91he strangled him\'92 /	strangle												to choke; to strangle		< nunugh-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				nunughtugh-	nunughtugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nuqaghta	ye2f5nf	spring (as in a steel trap)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 spring (as in a steel trap)		PE nuqa3-		CK Rub 375		nuqaghta	nuqaghta	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
nuqeghan	ye2s4fy	bowstring		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)													
\f0\i0 bowstring	ntnbdf	PE nuqa3-		CK V & E 106 Rub 376		nuqeghan	nuqeghan	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \
nuqeghsigh-	ye2s5ce4-	shortcut (take a ~  in order to overtake what one is pursuing)		neqeghsighaa \'91he took a shortcut in order to overtake him\'92 / sivuminilnguut neqeghsighluki kaatevzighii \'91he almost got to those that he was going after by taking a shortcut\'92; kilgaaqullghii ayumiq siivanlleghet ineghtaqiit nuqeghsighifqiita pisqelluki \'91long ago when they were running, the elders would forbid them to take shortcuts\'92													to take a shortcut in order to overtake what one is pursuing				CK A & W 66		nuqeghsigh-	nuqeghsigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nuqete-	ye2sns-	fortitude (have ~)		qiyaneghmeng nuqetuq \'91he refrained from crying\'92	self-restraint (practice ~)	refrain											to have fortitude; to practice self-restraint; to refrain		PE nuq0t-				nuqete-	nuqete-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nuqnegh-	ye2y]s4-	hold on (lest one fall)		nuqneghtuq \'91he's holding on\'92; nuqneghaa \'91he's holding on to it\'92 / nuqneghtaaghaa \'91he's holding on to it tightly\'92; nuqneghun \'91something to hold on to\'92													to hold on (lest one fall)		< nuqete-?-				nuqnegh-	nuqnegh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 -\
nuqsaleg-	ye2cfksu-	fall short barely		takukani nuqsalgaa uqiighulluni \'91he almost got to his destination, but he didn\'92t get there because he ran out of gas\'92; igaghyalleni suflughtegpenaan nuqsalgaa \'91he didn\'92t finish his schooling, but he almost did\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nuqete-	obtain (almost but not quite ~ (it))												to almost but not quite obtain (it); to fall short				CK A & W 66		nuqsaleg-	nuqsaleg-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1089 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
nuqutu-	ye2ene-	wide (be ~)		nuqutuuq \'91it is wide\'92 / nuqutuqaq \'91something that is wide\'92													to be wide (of clothing, openings, etc.)		PE n0qu				nuqutu-	nuqutu-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 -\
nuqutughte-	ye2ene5ns-	widen		nuqutughtuq \'91it got wider\'92; nuqutughtaa \'91he made it wider\'92 /													to widen		< nuqutu-?-				nuqutughte-	nuqutughte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nurgu	yehue	loop		= nugru	noose												loop; noose		PE n0!u3lu3				nurgu	nurgu	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1088 \u1075 \u1091 \
nurgu-	yehue-	loop (put a ~ in something)		nurguuq \'91he's putting a loop in something\'92; nurgaa \'91he's putting a loop in it\'92 / = nugru-													to put a loop in something		PE n0!u3lu3				nurgu-	nurgu-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1088 \u1075 \u1091 -\
nurgugtaq	yehue[nf2	skin boat part		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 part of skin boat		< nurgu-taq\super 1				\nosupersub nurgugtaq	nurgugtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1088 \u1075 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nusug-	yec/u-	pull out		nusugaa \'91he pulled it out\'92 / nusugutaa \'91he pulled something out for her\'92; qikmighhaq nusugaa kiiwegneng \'91he pulled the little dog out of the river\'92													to pull out		PE nuccu!-				nusug-	nusug-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
nusughagh-	yece4f4-	pass through an area of thin ice by breaking it before one as one goes		sallegpak ngepeghtaghput pegnem nusughaghaqluta \'91we barely went all the way through the area of thin ice by breaking it\'92; nusughameng aningughtukut \'91we made our way through the thin ice by breaking it before us as we went along\'92													to pass through an area of thin ice by breaking it before one as one goes				CK A & W 66		nusughagh-	nusughagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nusugniigh-	yec/uy74-	snare		nusugniightuq \'91he is snaring or trapping\'92 /	trap												to snare; to trap		< nusug-niigh-				nusugnigh-	nusugnxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nusugniighusiq	yec/uy74ecb2	snare made of baleen		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  nusughniighusit
\f2\i , for one snare													
\f0\i0 snare made of baleen		< nusugniigh-(u)siq				nusugnighusiq	nusugnxghusiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
nusugteqaq	yece[ns2f2	loop (to make a knot easy to untie (as the loops made when tying a shoelace))		nusugteqaakun sayukuvgu itemellequq \'91if you pull it by its loop it will come free\'92; singineghmeggni nusugteqighluki qillghutaqiit \'91when shoelaces are tied, they are tied loosely to be taken off easily\'92													loop (to make a knot easy to untie (as the loops made when tying a shoelace))		< nusug-?-qaq		CK A & W 66		nusugteqaq	nusugteqaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
nutaan	yen6y	just now		
\f2\i particle; said when something has just now happened and usually that has been anticipated as a desired occurence;
\f0\i0  nutaan kaatuq \'91ah, he's just arrived\'92	for the first time												just now; for the first time	ctqxfc. njkmrj xnj\\ dgthdst	PE nuta(C)an (under PE nuta3-); < nutagh-?-				nutan	nutxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1085 \
nutagh-	yenf4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > nutaghaq, nutaghte-, nutaan, nutaqiiq															PE nuta3-				nutagh-	nutagh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nutaghaq	yenf4f2	new thing		nutaghaaguq \'91it is new\'92; nutaghastun \'91like new\'92													new thing		PE nuta3a3 (under PE nuta3-)				nutaghaq	nutaghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nutaghin	yenf4by	newly formed and thickened sea ice with a smooth surface, no pressure ridges and no snow cover		
\f2\i see item 41 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												newly formed and thickened sea ice with a smooth surface, no pressure ridges and no snow cover		< nutaghaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -(u)n				nutaghin	nutaghin	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \
nutaghlin	yenf4kby	ice, newly formed that has become thick		< nutagh-?													newly formed ice that has become thick						nutaghlin	nutaghlin	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \
nutaghte-	yenf5ns-	renew or be renewed			new (make ~)	fix up											to make new; to renew or be renewed; to fix up		nutaghtuq \'91it has been renewed\'92; nutaghtaa \'91he renewed it, fixed it up\'92 / < nutagh-ghte-				nutaghte-	nutaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nutaqiiq	yenf272	snow (frost ~ on sea ice)		
\f2\i see item 42 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	frost snow on sea ice	new ice with frost crystals on surface								sea ice type			frost snow on sea ice; new ice with frost crystals on surface		< nutagh-?-				nutaqiq	nutaqxq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1179 \
nuteghaq	yens4f2	young adult		Sivuqam nuteghaa kiyang igaghyaataquq \'91most of the young people of Saint Lawrence Island go to school\'92; yuuk taana nuteghaaluninguq pinipigsaghpetuq \'91it is said that that man was really good when he was a young man\'92	adult, young												young adult		< nutagh-ghaq (?)		CK A & W 66 CK 		nuteghaq	nuteghaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
nutem	yensv	beginning (like this from the ~)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 "Waamtamken, nayagitunga avangitunga." "Uuk, iqlengalghiitenqun.  
\f2\i Nutemqun
\f0\i0  iqlengaqrulghiiten!\'94 \'91\'93I\'92m fooling you, I don\'92t have a sister, I don\'92t have any.\'94 \'93Oh, you are indeed a liar. 
\f2\i From the beginning
\f0\i0  you\'92ve been some kind of liar!\'94\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:8)	always (from the beginning)												like this from the beginning; always (from the beginning)		PE nut0m				nutem	nutem	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \
nutemtaq	yensvnf2	ice flow or field, older, with accumulated snow covering		
\f2\i see item 43 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												older ice floe or field with accumulated snow covering		< nutem-taq\super 1				\nosupersub nutemtaq	nutemtaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nuufik, nuuvik	y8abr. y8dbr	eye of needle			eyelet	hole for threading											eye of needle; eyelet; hole for threading		< nuuve-vik, nuuve-vik				nufik, nuvik	nxfik, nxvik	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 , \u1085 \u1263 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
nuug-	y8u-	surface (of seals, ducks)		nuugtuq \'91it surfaced, he stuck his head out\'92; nuugaa \'91it surfaced at it\'92 / neghsam nuugaa yuuk \'91the seal surfaced near the man\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nungyaghaq	stick one's head out through an opening												to surface (of seals, ducks); to stick one's head out through an opening		< nuge-				nug-	nxg-	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1075 -\
nuugaghte-	y8uf5ns-	suddenly move or change one\'92s mind		nuugaghtuq \'91he made a sudden move\'92 /	move suddenly	change one\'92s mind suddenly											to move suddenly; to change one's mind suddenly		< nuugte-aghte-				nugaghte-	nxgaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nuugh-	y84-	need (be in ~)		nuughtuq \'91he is in need or cannot reach\'92; nuughaa \'91he cannot reach it\'92 / nuughnaghtuq \'91it is scarce\'92; nuughniquq \'91he is in dire need\'92; neqmeng nuughtuq \'91he is short of food\'92; mekelghiighhaam nuughaa suflugaq \'91the boy can't reach the gun\'92; Nenglum ulimallghanun 
\f2\i nuughtuutkaagunga
\f0\i0 . \'91I 
\f2\i missed out
\f0\i0  on the building of the underground houses. \'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:10)	reach (be unable to ~)	short (be ~ of)								miss out on			to be in need; to be unable to reach; be short of; to miss out on		PE 0nu3-				nugh-	nxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1271 -\
nuughhute-	y85ens-	insufficient (be ~)		nuughhutuq \'91it is insufficient, there isn't enough of it\'92													to be insufficient		< nuugh-(u)te-				nughhute-	nxghhute-	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nuughqaghte-	y852f5ns-	protrude through an opening suddenly			surface suddenly	put one\'92s head through an opening											to suddenly protrude through an opening; to suddenly surface; to suddenly put one\'92s head through an opening		< nuug-qaghte-				nughqaghte-	nxghqaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nuughtugh-	y85ne4-	miss (be too late for)		Yuuk iilquq tengegkayuget 
\f2\i nuughtughluki
\f0\i0 . \'91The man was sad when he 
\f2\i missed
\f0\i0  the airplane.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 59)													to miss (be too late for)		< nuugh-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				nughtugh-	nxghtugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nuugpagte-	y8[gf[ns-	suddenly move or change one\'92s mind		nuugpagtuq \'91he made a sudden move\'92 /	move suddenly	change one\'92s mind suddenly											to move suddenly; to change one's mind suddenly		< nuugte-pagte-				nugpagte-	nxgpagte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nuugte-	y8[ns-	move		nuugtuq \'91he moved\'92; nuugtaa \'91he moved it\'92 / nuugtekan \'91if he moves\'92; nuugsimaaq \'91he has moved\'92; nuughqughtuq \'91he's moving things\'92													to move		PE nu!0t-				nugte-	nxgte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nuuk	y8r	surfaced seal		
\f2\i see also 
\f0\i0 nuug-, 
\f2\i the nominal counterpart of this word	
\f0\i0 seal, surfaced												surfaced seal						nuk	nxk	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1082 \
nuulgaghte-	y1kuf5ns-	chip the edge or tip of (it)		savini nuulgaghlluku iipgiitaa \'91he chipped the edge of his knife and it became dull\'92; nallemteggun sama tuvaq nuulgaghsimaa \'91the shore ice that is straight down from here broke off\'92	break off a piece from its edge or point												to chip the edge or tip of (it); to break off a piece from its edge or point				CK A & W 66		nulgaghte-	nxlgaghte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1265 \u1083 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nuulgun	y8kuey	crosspiece in roof of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i the crosspiece is supported by an internal pole
\f0\i0  (ayagun) 
\f2\i and supporting roof poles
\f0\i0  (ighuluq); = guulgun													crosspiece in roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)				Rubtsova Materialy p. 515		nulgun	nxlgun	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
nuunquta	y1y2enf	bubble(s) surfacing on the ocean from a bearded seal\'92s call before it surfaces after diving deep		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  nuunqutet,
\f2\i  for a series or mass of these bubbles; 
\f0\i0 avillghwaaghem nuunqutangi esghaghluki taakwavek qiifqaghsimalghiit \'91they saw the bubbles from the bearded seal\'92s call, so they turned in that direction\'92													bubble(s) surfacing on the ocean from a bearded seal\'92s call before it surfaces after diving deep				CK A & W 66		nunquta	nxnquta	\uc0\u1085 \u1265 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
nuupnigh-	y8gy]b4-	abate temporarily (of wind)		nuupnightuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nuupnighaa \'91the wind abated\'92 / anuqa nuupniqaghaqluni lliighaa \'91the wind is beginning to die down intermittently\'92	diminish temporarily (of wind)	die down temporarily (of wind)											to abate or diminish or die down temporarily (of wind)						nupnigh-	nxpnigh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1087 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
nuuqragti-	y82if[nb-	live in poverty		akikaghqiitem qenwat nuuqragtinganun lliightut \'91they didn\'92t have anything to sell, and so they started living in poverty\'92; neqangisagem neqmeng nuuqragtighllaguuq \'91he is living in poverty because he is out of food\'92													to live in poverty				CK A & W 66 CK 		nuqragti-	nxqragti-	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 -\
nuuskagllagan	y8crf[k]zufy	suddenly		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  nuuskagllagan yuuk qinuyugumalghii \'91suddenly the man got sick\'92													suddenly						nuskagllagan	nxskagllagan	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1089 \u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1085 \
nuuve-	y8ds-	do something correctly (figurative usage)		nuuvaa \'91he threaded it\'92 / qiipaq nuuvaa sikumun \'91she ran the thread through the eye of the needle\'92; nuuviiq \'91he threaded something\'92; nuuvutaa \'91she threaded something for him\'92; aghnam nuuvaa aghulata \'91the woman danced correctly to the dance tune\'92	run thread through the eye of a needle (or like thing)	thread (a needle)											to run thread through the eye of a needle (or like thing); to thread (a needle); to do something correctly (figurative usage)		< nuve-				nuve-	nxve-	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1074 \u1099 -\
nuuvusiq	y8decb2	needle threader			threader (needle ~)												needle threader		< nuuve-(u)siq				nuvusiq	nxvusiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1263 \u1074 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
nuuyvak	y1qdfr	knowledgeable elder		nuuyvaagtekat sivukluki ungipaghsugqaghqi \'91please ask the knowledgeable elders first\'92; whangkunneng nuuyvaguuten enankin sivuki \'91you\'92re a more knowledgeable elder than we are, so you go first\'92	elder, knowledgeable												knowledgeable elder				CK A & W 66		nuyvak	nxyvak	\uc0\u1085 \u1265 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
nuvag-	yedfu-	drool		nuvagtuq \'91he is drooling\'92; nuvagaa \'91he is drooling on it\'92 /													to drool		PE nuva!				nuvag-	nuvag-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 -\
nuvaglluk	yedf[k]/r	slime			fish slime												slime; fish slime		< nuvak-lluk				nuvaglluk	nuvaglluk	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
nuvagragh-	yedfuhf4-	moisten with saliva			saliva (moisten with ~)												to moisten with saliva		< nuvag-ragh-				nuvagragh-	nuvagragh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nuvak	yedfr	drool		nuvaga \'91his saliva\'92	saliva												drool; saliva		PE nuva!				nuvak	nuvak	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
nuvakataq	yedfrfnf2	kelp type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; cf. 
\f0\i0 nuvak									more exact identification needed				kind of kelp				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 61		nuvakataq	nuvakataq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
nuve-	yeds-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > nuverragh-, nuvugh-,  nuuve-															PE nuv0-				nuve-	nuve-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 -\
nuverraasiq 	yedsi6cb2	knitting needle															knitting needle		< nuverragh-(u)siq				nuverrasiq 	nuverrxsiq 	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1096 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
nuverragh-	yedsif4-	knit		nuverraghtuq \'91she knit\'92; nuverraghaa \'91she knit it\'92 / = neverragh-	thread through												to knit; to thread through		< nuve-rragh-				nuverragh-	nuverragh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1096 \u1072 \u1271 -\
nuvugh-	yede4-	string beads		nuvughtuq \'91she strung beads\'92; nuvughii \'91she strung them\'92 / 	beads (string ~)												to string beads		< nuve-ugh-				nuvugh-	nuvugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nuvuk	yeder	point		nuvugighaghtaa \'91he broke its tip\'92	tip												point; tip		PE nuvu!				nuvuk	nuvuk	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1082 \
Nuvuk	Yeder	Tkachen Bay in Chukotka (site near mouth of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site near mouth of Tkachen Bay in Chukotka		< nuvuk		CK		Nuvuk	Nuvuk	\uc0\u1053 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1082 \
nuvukraan	yederi6y	lace		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 lace		< nuvugh-krak-(u)n		CK Rub 373		nuvukran	nuvukrxn	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u257 \u1085 \
nuvukraasiq	yederi6cb2	sewing needle		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 sewing needle		< nuvugh-krak-(u)siq		CK Rub 373		nuvukrasiq	nuvukrxsiq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
nuvukruk	yederier	point or tip of knife, needle, etc.															point or tip of knife, needle, etc.		< nuvuk-?-				nuvukruk	nuvukruk	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1082 \
nuvulqugnak	yedek]2euyfr	clam, long-necked or soft-shelled		
\f2\i species identification undetermined	
\f0\i0 red-tip clam												long-necked or soft-shelled clam (called \'93red-tip\'94)		< nuvuk-?-				nuvulqugnak	nuvulqugnak	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
nuyaagh-	ye94-	timid (be ~ (said of animals))		nuyaaghtuq  \'91it is timid\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nuyughtugh-	wary (be ~ (said of animals))	unapproachable (be ~  (of animals))											to be timid; to be wary; be unapproachable (of animals)		PE nuyu!-				nuyagh-	nuyxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
nuyaaghite-	ye94bns-	timid (not be ~ (of animals))		nuyaaghituq \'91it is not timid\'92 /													to not be timid (of animals)		< nuyaagh-(ng)ite-				nuyaghite-	nuyxghite-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nuyaq	yez2	hair		
\f2\i used in the singular for one person's head of hair (as is the English word 
\f0\i0 "hair"): nuyaqa taakuq \'91my hair is long\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nuyileq													hair		PE nuya3				nuyaq	nuyaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1103 \u1179 \
nuyeklighpigaq	yeqsrk]b5gbuf2	oldest (the very ~ one)		avaqutaqa nuyeklighpigaq \'91my very oldest son\'92													the very oldest one		< nuyekliq-pigaq				nuyeklighpigaq	nuyeklighpigaq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
nuyekliq	yeqsrk]b2	oldest one		nuyeklighput \'91the oldest one of us\'92	older one												older or oldest one		PY-S nu$0 
\f2\i and postbase
\f0\i0  -qliq				nuyekliq	nuyekliq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
nuyiigh-	yeq74-	haircut (get or give a ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  nuyiightuq \'91he got a haircut\'92; nuyiighaa \'91he gave him a haircut\'92 /													to get or give a haircut		< nuyaq-(ng)igh-				nuyigh-	nuyxgh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1253 \u1251 \u1271 -\
nuyiite-	yeq7ns-	bald (be ~)															to be bald		< nuyaq-(ng)ite-		VK\'92s notes		nuyite-	nuyxte-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1253 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
nuyileq	yeqbks2	ice field that is beginning to break up with narrow open leads		
\f2\i see item 44 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nuyaq	sea ice type												ice field that is beginning to break up with narrow open leads						nuyileq	nuyileq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1253 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
nuyughtugh-	ye/5ne4-	timid (be ~ (said of animals or people))		nuyughtughtuq \'91he or it is timid\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nuyaagh-	wary (be ~ (said of animals or people))	shy (be ~ (said of animals or people))											to be timid; to be wary; to be shy (said of animals or people)		PE nuyu!-				nuyughtugh-	nuyughtugh-	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
nuziq	yepb2	parent of one\'92s child\'92s spouse		nuziqagka ighneghma sakikek nalighmeng panigma sakikek \'91my 
\f2\i nuziq
\f0\i0 s\sub 2\nosupersub  are my son\'92s mother-in-law and father-in-law, or my daughter\'92s mother-in-law and father-in-law\'92													one's child's spouse's parent; one's child's mother-in-law or father-in-law		PE nu9i3				nuziq	nuziq	\uc0\u1085 \u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1179 \
paagh-	g64-	lick clean with the tongue		paaghtuq \'91he licked something clean\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he/it lapped\'92; paaghaa \'91he licked it clean\'92 / paaghtuq sagneghmeng \'91he cleaned a bowl with his finger\'92	scrape with one's finger and lick off the finger	lap with the tongue											to lick clean with the tongue; to scrape with one's finger and lick off the finger; to lap with the tongue		PE 0ppa3i3-				pagh-	pxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1271 -\
paaghqata	gf5fnf	belt fastened criss-cross on to a long-handled dipnet		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 paaghqatet
\f2\i , used for one such thing; Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 belt fastened criss-cross on to a long-handled dipnet				CK Rub. 408		paghqata	pxghqata	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \
paaghqite-	g652bns-	vacant (be ~)		paaghqituq \'91it is vacant\'92 / Nepiighyata aqumyalghiimi 
\f2\i paaghqiteftuq.
\f0\i0 \ul  \ulnone \'91When the voices stopped, she sat up, and 
\f2\i there was nobody there.
\f0\i0 \'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:206); Qenwat qiinghaghsalghiimi mamlegllak 
\f2\i paaghqilnguq.
\f0\i0  \'91When she looked in it was very dark and 
\f2\i no one was there.
\f0\i0 \'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:206); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  paghqilngaate-	unpopulated (be ~)												to be vacant; to be unpopulated; to be without people		PY-S paq3it0-				paghqite-	pxghqite-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
paagna	g6uyf	up back there away from the water		
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  pag-; 
\f2\i extended demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 pagum \'91(of) the one up there\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 paagkut \'91those up there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative:
\f0\i0  paagyuq \'91you up there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun:
\f0\i0  tespagna 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  espagna \'91that one up there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  pagani \'91up there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  pagavek \'91to up there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 paaggun \'91through up there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb:
\f0\i0  paagken \'91from up there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional:
\f0\i0  paga \'91there (up there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb:
\f0\i0  tespagani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  espagani \'91there, up there\'92; pagavek Nome-emun pilta \'91let's go north to Nome\'92; tengegkayuget paga aliighumaat \'91the airplane is visible up there\'92; naaygham minglenga paga aliightuq tagitugiisalghiimi \'91the lower part of the mountain up there can be seen now that the fog has lifted some\'92	up above	north (to the ~)											that one up there, away from the water or up above; that one to the north		PE dem. pa!-				pagna	pxgna	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
paakw	g61r	grain of wood		paawa \'91its grain\'92													grain of wood		PE 0pa! (?)	p	VK\'92s notes		pakw	pxkw	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1265 \u1082 \
paallghu	g6k]5e	insect, small, found in dark, dusty or musty places		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 small insect found in dark, dusty or musty places						pallghu	pxllghu	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1091 \
paallitaqe-	g6k]bnf2s-	inconsiderate (be ~ of (him))		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  paallitaqaa \'91he is inconsiderate of her\'92 / paallitaqiiq \'91he is inconsiderate\'92													to be inconsiderate of (him)						pallitaqe-	pxllitaqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
paallnaghqengwaagh-	g6k]yf52s3164-	suffer severe loss (of loved ones, property, health, etc.)		qikmim neghiimakangi llimtaaghhiitneng neqmeng paallnaghqengngwaaghluki kiilqusiq neqekaghqiitneng \'91dogs had eaten their stored food so that they suffered the loss of their entire summer's supply\'92; ullghitangnaqluta paallnaghqengwaaghtutuk \'91buying a snowmachine really made us broke\'92; aamta nek taakuk paallnangqengngwaaghtuk, ighneghik qamagtuk meghmi un'gani peleghqaqlutek \'91as we know, a terrible tragedy befell that househould when both of its sons perished at sea\'92	run out of something completely												to suffer severe loss (of loved ones, property, health, etc.); to completely run out of something; to go broke						pallnaghqengwagh-	pxllnaghqengwxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\

\f1\b paama\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub g6vf\super s	\nosupersub pump		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 pump		from English \'91pump\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i (R404)		
\f0\i0 pamae	pxmae	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
paame-	g6vs-	pump		paamigu meq angyam samakenganeng paamesqughhaghqun taaggun uglaghivagilgan \'91pump that water out from the bottom of the boat with that little pump before the water increases too much\'92													to pump						pame-	pxme-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1084 \u1099 -\
paamkaan	g6vr6y	whaling gun with explosive projectile		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 gun, whaling, with explosive projectile												whaling gun with explosive projectile		probably from English \'91bomb gun\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R404)		
\f0\i0 pamkan	pxmkxn	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1084 \u1082 \u257 \u1085 \
paamkagh-	g6vrf4-	shoot with a whaling gun															to shoot with a whaling gun		
\f2\i apparently a back formation from
\f0\i0  paamkaan
\f2\i , by removal of an apparent or illusory instrumental postbase
\f0\i0  -(u)n 
\f2\i (realized as
\f0\i0  -an)				pamkagh-	pxmkagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
paamna	g6vyf	up there		
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  pam-; 
\f2\i obscured demonstrative pronoun;  relative singular pronoun:
\f0\i0  pamum \'91(of) the one up there\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 paamkut \'91those up there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative: 
\f0\i0 paamyuq \'91you, up there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun:
\f0\i0  tespamna 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  espamna \'91that one up there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  pamani \'91up there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  pamavek \'91to up there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 pamagun 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  paamggun \'91through up there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb: 
\f0\i0 pamaken 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  paamken \'91from up there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional: 
\f0\i0 pama \'91up there!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb:
\f0\i0  tespamani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  espamani \'91there, up there\'92; paamna naaygham qaaynga esghaghyaghtuulteggu \'91let's all go up and look around that mountain summit\'92; Ungaziq paamna aliighaa qilawaaghiisaqminigu \'91Chaplino (in Chukotka) is visible now that the clouds have lifted\'92; paamkut \'91the Siberians\'92; 
\f2\i means 
\f0\i0 \'91back of a person\'92, 
\f2\i when used as an ordinary noun and with a possessed ending as in
\f0\i0  paamnaka kuumkaghhu \'91scratch my back please\'92	northward	behind								Chukotka (from St. Lawrence Is.)			that one up there; that one to the north; Chukotka from the viewpoint of St. Lawrence Island; that one behind; back of a person		PE dem. pam-				pamna	pxmna	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
paamyuk	g6vm/r	protruberance at base of harpoon		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 harpoon (protruberance at base of  ~)												protruberance at base of harpoon		PE pamyu3		CK Rub. 404		pamyuk	pxmyuk	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
paangghun	g634ey	double-bladed paddle for kayak		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf.
\f0\i0  pangeghte-													double-bladed paddle for kayak		PE pa&03un (under pa&03-)		CK Rub. 405		pangghun	pxngghun	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
paangghutngwaaq	g634en31]62	sorrel 			
\f2\i Rumex beringensis or Rumex graminifolius												
\f0\i0 sorrel 
\f2\i (Rumex beringensis or Rumex graminifolius)		
\f0\i0 < paangghun-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		from Aynganga\'92s \'93Beringia\'94 article		pangghutngwaq	pxngghutngwxq	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1187 \u1265 \u1100 \u257 \u1179 \
paani-	g6yb-	work on something but not to completion		ulimaani paanisqughluki wiin pegtii sanaluni \'91he had someone rough out his carvings, but then he put them aside to go do something else \'92; paanistengngwaaqaq nanughwaaq iiglluni naalkumakanga \'91when he was digging he found a not-completed figurine of a polar bear figurine\'92	outline ivory carving or the like	rough-out ivory carving or the like											to work on something but not to completion; to outline or rough-out ivory carving or the like				CK A & W 68		pani-	pxni-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1085 \u1080 -\
paaptaaye-	g6gn6qs-	baptise		John 
\f2\i Paaptaayesta
\f0\i0  \'91John the 
\f2\i Baptist
\f0\i0 \'92 (Matthew 3.1)													to baptise		from English \'91baptise\'92	SLI			paptaye-	pxptxye-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1087 \u1090 \u257 \u1253 \u1099 -\
paaqngite-	g623]bns-	deserted (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  
\f2\i used (only?) in the subordinative,
\f0\i0  paaqngunani \'91(it) being vacant, uninhabited\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  paaghqite-	uninhabited (be ~)	empty (be ~)								vacant (be ~)			to be deserted, uninhabited, empty, vacant				CK Rub. 402		paqngite-	pxqngite-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1179 \u1187 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
paara, paaraq	g6hf. g6hf2	handlebar of sled		Patam iikluku kaviiq tuunaa Kanumun. Kanum qamiyem 
\f2\i paaraakun
\f0\i0  qeputaa. \'91Pata removed the fox (from the trap) and gave it to Kanu. Kanu tied it to the 
\f2\i handlebar
\f0\i0  of the sled.\'92 (UNKUS. 12)	bar at lower back of sled												handlebar of sled; bar at lower back of sled		from English \'91bar\'92	SLI			para, paraq	pxra, pxraq	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1088 \u1072 , \u1087 \u257 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
paarghu	g6h4e	appendix (anatomical)		Aghallegtam pilaglunga 
\f2\i paarghuka
\f0\i0  iikaa. \'91The doctor operated one me and removed my 
\f2\i appendix
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 131)													appendix (anatomical)		perhaps related to Chukch per\'92uten \'91raincoat of thick walrus gut\'92	10, 14		paarghulliqe-	parghu	pxrghu	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1088 \u1271 \u1091 \
paarghulliqe-	g6h4ek]b2s-	appendicitis (have ~)		paarghulliquq \'91he had appendicitis\'92 /													to have appendicitis		< paarghu-lluk-liqe-				parghulliqe-	pxrghulliqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1088 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
paaskaghqaq	g6crf52f2	top of skin-boot (strip of skin or fabric for ~)			edging material for use around an opening												strip of skin or fabric for top of skin-boot; edging material for use around an opening		< paya-kaghqaq				paskaghqaq	pxskaghqaq	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1089 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
paaslaq	g6ck]f2	forearm bone (upper part of ~)		neghsam paaslaa makighhu \'91eat the meat off of the seal\'92s upper forearm bone\'92; ayveghem paaslii aangut \'91a walrus\'92 upper forearms are big\'92													upper part of the forearm bone		PE pa9vi!		CK A & W 68		paslaq	pxslaq	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \
paasliq	g6ck]b2	cuff of sleeve of garment															cuff of sleeve of garment		< paya-liq				pasliq	pxsliq	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
paasqutaq	g6c2enf2	bag made from two sealskins sewn together		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 paasqutak
\f2\i , for one bag													
\f0\i0 bag made from two sealskins sewn together				CK Rub 407		pasqutaq	pxsqutaq	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
paasqute-	g6c2ens-	face each other		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  paasqutuq malghukaghtaan qamaglluni tamaana mangteghasqwaaq \'91all the make-shift shelters are facing each other, one to one\'92													to face each other				CK Rub 407		pasqute-	pxsqute-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
paatgutaq	g6n[enf2	racket-like device used in traditional game		= patgutaq	tennis racket												racket-like device used in traditional game; tennis racket		PE pat!uta3 (under PE pat0!-); < pateg-(u)taq				patgutaq	pxtgutaq	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1090 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
paawagh-	g61f4-	peg out a sealskin on the ground to dry		paawaghluku amiiraq kineghsimaa nunaaghmi \'91he pegged out a sealskin on the ground and it dried there\'92; niightuutngillghem paawaghluki pimiit \'91they didn\'92t have a drying frame, so they dried it pegging it out on the ground\'92													to peg out a sealskin on tthe ground to dry		PE pa!u!-				pawagh-	pxwagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
paawaq	g61f2	sealskin pegged out on  the ground to dry															sealskin pegged out on  the ground to dry		PE pa!u!-				pawaq	pxwaq	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
paawra	g61hf	baking soda		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 soda, baking												baking soda		from English \'91powder\'92	Chuk.	CK Rub. 401		pawra	pxwra	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1265 \u1088 \u1072 \
paayghaate-	g6q46ns-	break something when it is still new		ivenruutkenghhagteng paayghaasimakegket qalmesilluteng \'91they  broke the motor that they just got by running into an underwater boulder\'92; paayghaasaqunakek aleghquusik kelengakngwaaghlukek \'91be careful not to break the new citizen\'92s-band radio; take good care of it\'92													to break something when it is still new				CK A & W 68		payghate-	pxyghxte-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
paayghaq	g6q4f2	belt made from the material on the edge of a sealskin															belt made from the material on the edge of a sealskin	kf[nfxbq bkb ythgbxbq htvtym					payghaq	pxyghaq	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
paayghutaq	g6q4enf2	screw		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 screw	ieheg			CK Rub. 401		payghutaq	pxyghutaq	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
paayngute-	g63ens-	begin (a trend, activity, ceremony, etc.)		atughnaqelghiit paayngulluki unitii \'91he started the drumming for them and then left them\'92; ullghitangyuwhaaqaq taana paayngutikaaguq \'91he was the first one to get a snowmachine, and everyone else got them after him\'92	start (a trend, activity, ceremony, etc.)	open a ceremony											to begin (a trend, activity, ceremony, etc.); to start (a trend, activity, ceremony, etc.); to open a ceremony				CK A & W 68		payngute-	pxyngute-	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b paaypela\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub g6qgskz\super s	\nosupersub bible		
\f2\i used in the plural: 
\f0\i0 paaypelet \'91the Bible\'92													bible		from English \'91bible\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 160		paypelae	pxypelae	\uc0\u1087 \u257 \u1253 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
Pagaaliit	Gfu6k7n	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan				CK		Pagalit	Pagxlxt	\uc0\u1055 \u1072 \u1075 \u257 \u1083 \u1251 \u1090 \
Pagaliit	Gfufk7n	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 146		Pagalit	Pagalxt	\uc0\u1055 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1090 \
pagavesengwaaq	gfufdscs3162	skin-boot, knee-high, man\'92s, of reindeer leg		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 pagavek (
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 pagani)													knee-high man\'92s skin-boot of reindeer leg						pagavesengwaq	pagavesengwxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
pagelevzeghaq	gfusksdps4f2	powder, fine															fine powder		< pagula-vzeghaq				pagelevzeghaq	pagelevzeghaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1079 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b paggaagte-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gf[6[ns-\'a1	breathe hard audibly															to audibly breathe hard		< paggaak-?-				paggagte-1	paggxgte-1	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub paggaagte-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gf[f[ns-\'99	filled with air		qikmit tuqutkiit aqsangit paggagteghllagumaat akuwaaghtat \'91it turns out that the dogs that they killed had bloated stomachs since days ago\'92; mallut paggaggneghmeggni pugleghallghi quulvaghllagaqut \'91when walrus carcasses bloat, they float really high out of the water\'92	bloated (be ~)												to be filled with air; to be bloated				CK A & W 68; Rub. 408		paggagte-2	paggxgte-2	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub paggaak	gf[6r	windy sound			noise of wind												windy sound; noise of wind						paggak	paggxk	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u257 \u1082 \
pagh-	gf4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > paghsi-, paghyugh-																			pagh-	pagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1271 -\
paghneq	gf4ys2	lower part of leg under the knee															the lower part of leg under the knee	xfcnm yjub gjl rjktyjv			CK Rub. 401		paghneq	paghneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
paghqigh-	gf52b5-	learn		Naten Yuuk 
\f2\i Paghqiimaa
\f0\i0  Tengaaneghmeng \'91How Man 
\f2\i Learned
\f0\i0  to Fly\'92 
\f2\i (title of  a certain book, 
\f0\i0 Tambi 1936); paghqingllaghyaghqaawaquq \'91he must go for training\'92	discover (how)								is this correct ?				to learn; to discover (how)				from the Russian book, and Rub. 408		paghqigh-	paghqigh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 -\
paghqilngaate-	gf52bk36ns-	steal away		paghqilngaatuq \'91he stole away\'92; paghqilngaataa \'91he did it when no one else was around, he stole away with it\'92 / paghqilngaatuq aga yakughnamun aghulaquq whangkuta waaknaniqaamaluta \'91evidently he stole away to the hazardous place while we weren't paying attention\'92; paghqilngaatiiq entaqun aga suflugameng \'91he seems to have stolen away unnoticed with a gun\'92; mekelghiighhaak elngaatall paghqilngaataak alla mekelghiighhaq uglaalluku \'91two little boys overwhelmed another little boy when no one was around\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 paaghqite-	do something when no one else is around	encounter something when no one else is around								experience something when no one else is around			to steal or slip away; to do, encounter or experience something when no one else is around						paghqilngate-	paghqilngxte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
paghsi-	gf4cb-	sleepy (be ~ after being out in the fresh air)		taghnughhaq qavaghtuq taakluku paghsiluni \'91the baby slept for a long time after being out in the fresh air\'92; paghsisighaa \'91he took him out into the fresh air so that he would be sleepy afterwards\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  paghyug-	sleep soundly from being out in fresh air												to be sleepy or to sleep soundly after being out in the fresh air						paghsi-	paghsi-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1089 \u1080 -\
paghyanghaghte-	gf4mzy4f5ns-	catch when one is unprepared (and be forced to act)		igleghqaannaqelghiit apeghiightestegpenaan paghyanghaghtaat \'91they were going to leave without letting him get ready and they made him rush\'92; nunmaagneghutmineng paghyanghaghtestaquq \'91because of his slowness he ends up rushing when they are going\'92	force (one) to act when one is unprepared	unprepared (get caught or forced to act when one is ~)								rush when unprepared			to catch or get caught, force or be forced to act when one is unprepared; to rush when unprepared				CK A & W 68 CK 		paghyanghaghte-	paghyanghaghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
paghyugh-	gf4m/4-	sleepy (be ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  paghsi-; = peghyugh-	tired (be ~)												to be tired; to be sleepy						paghyugh-	paghyugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
pagi-	gfub-	stay behind		pagiiq \'91he stayed behind\'92 / paginaqunga maani elpesi angyaamalusi \'91I'll stay behind while you go out with the boat\'92; yaywaalingiighhaq taana esgha pagilghii ima qavngaghpaggaaneng \'91that poor little orphan has remained and survived all alone for some time\'92	remain (to watch over things, as a survivor, etc.) 												to stay behind; to remain (to watch over things, as a survivor, etc.)		PE pa!i-				pagi-	pagi-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 -\
Pagileq	Gfubks2	former village at Cape Yyergyn on Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village at Cape Yyergyn on Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka						Pagileq	Pagileq	\uc0\u1055 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
pagiqe-	gfub2s-	nurse			take care of												to nurse; to take care of	yzyxbn	< pagi-?-		CK V & E 75, CK		pagiqe-	pagiqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
pagitaq	gfubns-	inheritance			keepsake												inheritance; something left for someone as an inheritance; keepsake		< pagite-aq				pagitaq	pagitaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pagite-	gfubns-	leave as an inheritance		pagitaa \'91he left it as an inheritance\'92, \'91he kept it as a keepsake\'92, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he took care of it for the owner\'92 / 	keep as a keepsake of someone	ake care of for the owner when owner is away											to leave as an inheritance; to keep as a keepsake of someone; to take care of for the owner when owner is away		< pagi-(u)te-				pagite-	pagite-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pagkwaaq	gf[r162	below (area right ~ foothills)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  paagna	base of the mountains slightly higher than the plain												area right below foothills; base of the mountains slightly higher than the plain						pagkwaq	pagkwxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
Pagkwaaq	gf[r162	site near the foothills on the back side of Savoonga Mts. or Kukulget Mts.											where is this??				site near the foothills on the back side of Savoonga Mts. or Kukulget Mts.		< *pagna (> paagna)				Pagkwaq	Pagkwxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
pagrugaq	gfuheuf2	tufted puffin			puff, tufted	
\f2\i Lunda cirrhata											
\f0\i0 tufted puffin (Lunda cirrhata)						pagrugaq	pagrugaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
pagsinga-	gf[cb3f-	attend		pagsinganaqnaqunga atulghiinun \'91I'll try to attend the Eskimo song session\'92	present (be ~)	watch something (a performance or the like)								watch stealthily			to attend; to be present; to watch something (a performance or the like); to watch stealthily (?)				\'91stealthily\'92 gloss is from Rub.		pagsinga-	pagsinga-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 -\
pagugh-	gfue4-	ripple effect on surface of sea in the distance															for there to be a ripple in the distance on the surface of the sea						pagugh-	pagugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
pagula	gfuekz	dust			cloudiness in liquid												dust; cloudiness in liquid		PE pa!u(la)				pagula	pagula	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \
pagulangigh-	gfuekz3b4-	dust (remove ~)			filter (liquid)												to dust; to filter (liquid)		< pagula-(ng)igh-				pagulangigh-	pagulangigh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
paguluqe-	gfueke2s-	murky (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 cloudy (be ~)	dim (be ~)											to be murky, cloudy or dim	venysq			CK V & E 130  		paguluqe-	paguluqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
paguneghqegkaq	gfueys52s[rf2	dish of reindeer tallow, seal oil, snow and berries			Eskimo \'93ice cream\'94												dish of reindeer tallow, seal oil, snow and berries; Eskimo \'93ice cream\'94						paguneghqegkaq	paguneghqegkaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
paguneghqutaq	gfueys52enf2	crowberry shrub		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 crowberry shrub	zujybr. zujlysq recn	< pagunghaq-qutaq		CK Rub. 400 CK		paguneghqutaq	paguneghqutaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
pagunghangeltaq	gfuey4f3sk]nf2	raisin		Taakuni Ivaqaankuni 
\f2\i rice
\f0\i0 -a, 
\f2\i pagunghangeltaq
\f0\i0 , neqekrapik neghestekaqaat. \'91It was among that family of Ivaqaq\'92s that they fed one rice, 
\f2\i raisins
\f0\i0 , and pilot bread.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:200)													raisin		< pagunghaq-ngestaq				pagunghangeltaq	pagunghangeltaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
pagunghaq*	gfuey4f2	crowberry or curlewberry		\'91blackberry\'92 
\f2\i is a local English term for this berry, but it is not the same as the commercial blackberry; 
\f0\i0 pagunghaq
\f2\i  is the term used for
\f0\i0  \'91berry\'92 
\f2\i in general as well as for 
\f0\i0 Empretum nigrum
\f2\i  specifically	
\f0\i0 berry	blackberry								
\f2\i Empretum nigrum 
\f0\i0 or
\f2\i  Empretum subholarcticum			
\f0\i0 crowberry or curlewberry 
\f2\i (Empretum nigrum or Empretum subholarcticum)		
\f0\i0 PE pa!un3a3				pagunghaq*	pagunghaq*	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
pagutet	gfuensn	flooring (material (usually pebbles) put under ~ of the traditional dome-shaped house)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 material (usually pebbles) put under flooring of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)				CK Rub 401		pagutet	pagutet	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \
pakag-	gfrfu-	pry with a lever		pakagaa \'91he pried it\'92 / pakagluku uumga salngagllagem qelpeghsimaak \'91he opened the big box by prying off the top cover\'92; pakagaghsimakanga aquutam piiknanga ivenruutegneng ifkaghvikluku \'91he sheared off the top part of the rudder by dropping the motor on it\'92	raise by prying	push by prying								remove part by prying			to pry with a lever; to raise, push or remove part by prying						pakag-	pakag-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1075 -\
pakagusiq	gfrfuecb2	lever															lever		< pakag-(u)siq				pakagusiq	pakagusiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
pakeg-	gfrsu-	flex		pakegtuq \'91he or it bent forward\'92; paakgaa \'91he bent it, it (age) is making him bend over\'92 / paakgutigu liiqneq taana tanpeghqun \'91fold the dried walrus skin over that scrap\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  pakreg-	bend	bent (be ~ by old age)								fold			to flex; to bend; to fold; to be bent by old age		PE pak0!-				pakeg-	pakeg-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1075 -\
pakegte-	gfrs[ns-	bend or flex a joint		pakegtuq \'91he bend (himself) over\'92; pakegtaa \'91he bent it over\'92 / pakeglluku tanpeq unitigu \'91fold the dried walrus skin and leave it\'92; aghnaq aqsalilqwaaghaqaq pakeggneghmeng aghtughtuq \'91that woman in the advanced stage of pregnancy is having a hard time bending over\'92; pakegllunga iightunga mingllutem awatanganun \'91I bent over and hid behind the fence\'92; angyameng amighilghiit tanpeghhet pakegtaqiit paagnangi ilutmun enkaam putungitgun tapghaghmeng nuvughaqluki ayugitun qilleghquutaqiit angyam temangakun \'91people putting a skin covering on a boat fold the skin edges tightly over the top of the frame and fasten the folded-over part onto the ribbing by looping rope through the holes made before the skin was dried\'92	bend forward	roll up something								fold over			to bend or flex at a joint; to bend over forward; to roll up something		< pakeg-te\super 1\nosupersub -		3rd gloss CK Rub. 402		pakegte-	pakegte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pakemna	gfrsvyf	up on the  mountain		
\f2\i Chukotkan; base:
\f0\i0  pakem-; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 pakemkut \'91those up above\'92, \'91those up on the mountain\'92	up above												the one up above; the up on the  mountain				Men. 1962:260		pakemna	pakemna	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
pakestiya	gfrscnbz	rope running from gunnel to mast of boat		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 rope running from gunnel to mast of boat		from English \'91backstay\'92	SLI Chuk.	R402		pakestiya	pakestiya	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1080 \u1103 \
pakestiyaghmii	gfrscnbz4v7	man in skin boat who throws out the first float of the harpoon line, positioned in boat behind the striker															man in skin boat who throws out the first float of the harpoon line, positioned in boat behind the striker		< pakestiya-mii				pakestiyaghmi	pakestiyaghmx	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1080 \u1103 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 \
pakfalla	gfrafk]z	west															west		cf. PE dem. pak0m-				pakfalla	pakfalla	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1092 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
pakig-	gfrbu-	pull		
\f2\i the last two meanings are evidently figurative uses of this word much as in English one can "brush aside" thoughts or cares;
\f0\i0  pakigtuq \'91he hooked onto something and pulled himself forward\'92; pakigaa \'91he hooked onto it and pulled it\'92 / pakiglukek qergesek ayaqighnalghiik minglekun aangqaq tugaa tunutanganilnguq \'91he pulled on the top of the window that was  against the wall and took the ball from behind it\'92; pakigluni uusqalghiikun minglekun sayugumaghmi qamavenganun iteghtuq \'91he hooked his hand over the high fence and pulled himself inside\'92; sivuliq aghnaghaq qepghaghyulghii legan pakigluku ilangii kinguliit tugulaghiit qepghaghtenguluki \'91passing over the first girl who really wanted to work they took the others for the positions\'92; umyugagka temitengelghiik pakikaghlukek nenglaghtunga elngaatall ugima gginaa puyughllak nenglaghnaq esghaghluku \'91I dismissed my sad thoughts for a while when I saw my husband's funny sooty face\'92	grab	ignore								dismiss from the mind			to hook one's hand onto (it) and pull either bringing it toward oneself or pulling oneself toward it or past it; to grab much for oneself; to dismiss from the mind; to ignore or pass over		PE paki!-		4th glosses from Rub. 401		pakig-	pakig-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1075 -\
pakigneq	gfrbuys2	greedy person			grabby person												greedy person; grabby person		< pakig-neq\super 2				\nosupersub pakigneq	pakigneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
pakigniigh	gfrbuy74-	get more than intended			more (get ~ than intended)												to get more than intended		< pakig-niigh-		VK\'92s notes		pakignigh-	pakignxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
pakigsigh-	gfrb[cb4-	stepped on or pushed aside by others in their striving to get ahead (be ~)															to be stepped on or pushed aside by others in their striving to get ahead		< pakig-sigh- (?)		VK		pakigsigh-	pakigsigh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
pakineg-	gfrbysu-	scratch		pakinegtuq \'91he scratched himself\'92; pakin'gaa \'91he scratched her or it\'92 / pakinerewaaghluku kaneq qergesegnekun qineghllunga esghaghanka aghulaqestegpenaki \'91I scratched off the frost from the window and looked out at them before they left\'92													to scratch		PE pakin0!- (under PE paki!-); < pakig-?-				pakineg-	pakineg-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1075 -\
pakreg-	gfrisu-	bend		pakregtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  pakregaa \'91it bent\'92 / pakregtaa \'91he bent it\'92; pakregngaaq \'91it is bent\'92; nunivak pakregaa \'91the rosewort plant is bending over\'92; pakregten \'91bend your knees!\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  pakeg-	curl	warp								fold			to bend; to curl; to warp; to fold						pakreg-	pakreg-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1075 -\
pakreghqe-	gfris52-	huddle up from cold		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 tense up												to huddle up from cold; to tense up	t;bncz jn [jkjlf 	< pakreg-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -		CK V & E 173; 2nd gloss Rub. 402		pakreghqe-	pakreghqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 -\
pakregneq	gfrisuys2	neck (narrow curved ~ of a dried walrus stomach)		suflugem pakregnegha \'91the elbow of the stovepipe\'92	duodenum	elbow (non-anotomical)											narrow curved neck of a dried walrus stomach; duodenum; non-anatomical elbow		< pakreg-neq\super 2				\nosupersub pakregneq	pakregneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
pakrek	gfrisr	knife (curved carving knife)															curved carving knife						pakrek	pakrek	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \u1096 \u1099 \u1082 \
palagh-	gfkz4-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > palaghhaghte-, palaghhaq, palaghte-, palaghyug-, palaqe-, palatun															PE pala3-				palagh-	palagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 -\
palaghhaghte-	gfkz5f5ns-	shortchange or be shortchanged		palaghhaghsimalghiinga uulqimeng tukfighilunga taawa \'91well, I bought too few potatoes\'92; palaghhaghsimakangat tukfighluki kaviighi \'91they paid him less than his due when they bought his fox skins\'92 	decrease in amount	not get or give enough								fewer (become ~)			to not get or give enough; to shorchange or be shortchanged; to decrease in amount; to become fewer		< palagh-aghte-				palaghhaghte-	palaghhaghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
palaghhaq 	gfkz5f2	small amount		palaghhaagut iganka \'91my books are few\'92; akumemeng palaghhaghmeng tuunaanga \'91he gave me only a little sugar\'92													small amount		< palagh-ghhaq				palaghhaq 	palaghhaq 	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
palaghmete-	gfkz4vsns-	small or few (be ~)		palaghmetuq \'91it is small, helpless, weak\'92 / aamta palaghmetut taakut net \'91as we know, that household is poor\'92; palaghmellunga angyaghpak kaatkayuguyaghniiqaat tamaghhaani ayumiqullghem \'91they say that when I was small the ship used to come once a year\'92; elpek amiiraghpek akinga palaghmetuq \'91the price or cost of your sealskin is low\'92	young and helpless (be ~)	poor (be ~)								weak (be ~)			to be small, poor or weak; to be young and helpless; to be few		< palagh-mete\super 1\nosupersub -				palaghmete-	palaghmete-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
palaghte-	gfkz5ns-	pacify		atangan aghnaghaghhaam waran anglakek palaghsimakek naaygham minglenganun aligateghllak naayvaghusimakanga minglem tunganganun \'91the little girl's father pacified her in her wish to go to the hill by taking her to the lake near it\'92; anglagka waran palaghtikek \'91at least temporarily do as I want you to!\'92	appease temporarily												to pacify; to appease temporarily		< palagh-?-				palaghte-	palaghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
palaghute-	gfkz4ens-	shortchange or be shortchanged			decrease in amount	not get or give enough								fewer (become ~)			to not get or give enough; to shorchange or be shortchanged; to decrease in amount; to become fewer		< palagh-?-				palaghute-	palaghute-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
palaghyug-	gfkz4m/u-	slighted (feel ~)		palaghyugtuq \'91he feels slighted\'92 / aghnaq palaghyugluni akumemeng tunusamineng ighivgaq alla aqfatuq unaamingani uglaghataghluku pingnaluni \'91the woman felt that she had gotten too little sugar yesterday so she went for more today\'92	feel that one hasn\'92t received his due												to feel slighted; to feel that one hasn\'92t received his due		< palagh-yug-				palaghyug-	palaghyug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
palaghyuke-	gfkz4m/rs-	insufficient (regard as ~)			inferior (regard as ~)												to regard as insufficient or inferior		< palagh-yug-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				palaghyuke-	palaghyuke-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -\
palaghyuketaq	gfkz4m/rsnf2	rude person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 inconsiderate person	impolite person											one that is rude, inconsiderate, impolite				CK Rub. 403		palaghyuketaq	palaghyuketaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
palaqanin	gfkz2fyby	lesser		
\f2\i particle (?)	
\f0\i0 little bit	not too much											lesser; little bit; not too much				CK Rub. 403 CK		palaqanin	palaqanin	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1085 \
palaqe-	gfkz2s-	insufficient (regard as ~)		palaqaa \'91he feels that it isn't enough\'92 / yugem palaqlukek radio-squghhaak ighsakumaak kaatinaanghinnilukek uyavanun nagatusiilutek \'91he regarded the little radio as being not powerful enough to reach over long distance so he refused to take it\'92; palaqem angtalanganeng yaywaali mekelghiiq yugem pakigaqluku ilangi yuget tamaakut tuqlughteghumakangi \'91the man felt that the orphan boy was too frail so he ignored him calling on the other people instead\'92	inferior (regard as ~)												to regard as insufficient or inferior		< palagh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				palaqe-	palaqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 -\
palaqetagh-	gfkz2snf4-	not want to help out		palaqetiilnguum kina alngunak kayusighyugluku ayuqaa \'91someone that isn\'92t lazy is willing to help anyone\'92; palaqetalghiim pingigatii \'91one that doesn\'92t help out, doesn\'92t do it\'92	help out (not want to ~)												to not want to help out				CK A & W 69 CK		palaqetagh-	palaqetagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
palaqiigate-	gfkz27ufns-	not pay attention		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 not give consideration	attention (not pay ~)								consideration (not give ~)			to not pay attention or give consideration				CK Rub. 403		palaqigate-	palaqxgate-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \u1251 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
palatun	gfkzney	little (a ~ at a time)															a little at a time		< palagh-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 palatun	palatun	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
paligh- 	gfkb4-	turn autumn colors		palightuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  palighaa \'91it turned autumn colors, he suntanned\'92 / nunivagsaghaq palighaa \'91the vegetation turned yellow, red, and brown\'92	suntan	ripen											to turn autumn colors; to suntan; to ripen		PE pali3-		3rd gloss CK Rub. 403		paligh- 	paligh- 	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
palighte-	gfkb5ns-	fade		palightuq \'91it faded, he got tanned\'92; palightaa it \'91(the sun) turned it autumn colors\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91it (sun)tanned him\'92; upenghami siqineghllugmi palighqwaataqaa an'gituqat \'91in the springtime sun those who stay out a lot get very suntanned\'92 /	tan	suntan											to fade; to (sun)tan		< paligh-?-		CK Rub 402		palighte-	palighte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Palighvik	gfkb4dbr	August		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time when vegetation turns to autumn colors\'92; 
\f2\i also given in one source as
\f0\i0  July	September												August; September		< paligh-vik				Palighvik	Palighvik	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
paliqaq	gfkb2f2	tanned (suntanned) thing		paliqaq vegaaq \'91dried straw\'92													(sun)tanned thing		< paligh-(g)kaq				paliqaq	paliqaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
palleg-	gfk]su-	brush off snow, dirt or spiritual contamination		pallegtuq \'91he brushed himself off\'92, or \'91he brushed something\'92; paallgaa \'91he brushed her or it (garment) off\'92 / ayumiq Yupiget paallgaqegkangit seghleliilleghqaq ellmeggneng yughamsugumaghmeng \'91long ago the Yupik people brushed off bad spirits from themselves as they said their prayers\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 alleg-													to brush off snow, dirt or spiritual contamination						palleg-	palleg-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 -\
pallnaghqe-	gfk]yf52s-	end (come to an ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 worn out (be ~)	exhausted (be ~)											to end; to be worn out; to be exhausted	rjyxfncz. bcczrfnm			CK V & E 75		pallnaghqe-	pallnaghqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
palluggnaq	gfk]/[yf2	rough water															rough water		< pallugte-naq				palluggnaq	palluggnaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
pallugte-	gfk]/[ns-	thrash around in the water		pallugtuq \'91he or it is thrashing around\'92 / palluglleghhii yuuk esghaghaqa meghmi \'91I saw a person struggling in the water\'92; pallugtuq mekelghiighhaq unulqusiq repall talligmineng gginamkun tenpaaghaghaanga \'91the little boy was so restless last night that he kept hitting my face with his arms as he tossed and turned\'92	toss and turn in one's sleep												to thrash around in the water; to toss and turn in one's sleep						pallugte-	pallugte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
palngeri-	gfk3shb-	attend an event		atulghiinunnguq palngerinaqut \'91they are going to go attend the singing session\'92	check (go and ~ on an event)												to attend an event; to go and check on an event				A&W 69		palngeri-	palngeri-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1099 \u1088 \u1080 -\
palughtaq	gfk/5nf2	sea otter		
\f2\i this animal is rarely found in the Yupik area, and not on St. Lawrence Is.	Enhydra lutris	
\f0\i0 beaver								
\f2\i Castor canadensis			
\f0\i0 sea otter
\f2\i  (Enhydra lutris); 
\f0\i0 beaver
\f2\i  (Castor canadensis)		
\f0\i0 PE palu3taq				palughtaq	palughtaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
palutaq	gfkenf2	brace (as used in making a skin boat)															brace (as used in making a skin boat)						palutaq	palutaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
palutigh-	gfkenb4-	brace		tiintam minglengi unaghsimeng palutighluteng ayuqut \'91the tent\'92s walls are braced with sticks\'92; uullghaghhnayukata palutightughiit \'91just in case they roll, they were braced\'92													to brace		< palutaq-ligh-		CK A & E 69		palutigh-	palutigh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1091 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\
pama-	gfvf-	flicker (of flame)		anuqataghaam pamastaa naniq \'91the draft made the lamp flicker\'92; nuyani sangan pamasteghllagtagu? \'91why did he let his hair get so disheveled?\'92	disheveled (be ~ (of hair))												to flicker (of flame); to be disheveled (of hair)		PY pama-				pama-	pama-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 -\
pamyughaq	gfvm/4f2	tailbone		pamyughani ayemtaa iquluni \'91he broke his tailbone by falling\'92	coccyx												tailbone; coccyx		PE pamyu3a3 (under PE pamyu3)				pamyughaq	pamyughaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
pana	gfyf	spear															spear		PE pana				pana	pana	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \
pana-	gfyf-	spear		vegtaaghem panaaqaa yuuk \'91the bee is stinging the man\'92	sting (of bee)												to spear; to sting (of bee)		PE pana				pana-	pana-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 -\
panaaghaq	gfy64f2	spear, toy, little or makeshift			peg used to anchor to the ice a walrus carcuss in water												toy, little or makeshift spear; peg used to anchor to the ice a walrus carcuss in water		< pana-aghaq				panaghaq	panxghaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
panalghuta	gfyfk4enf	side pole in summer tent		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 panalghutek
\f2\i , for one pole													
\f0\i0 side pole in summer tent		< pana-lghun (?)		CK Rub 405		panalghuta	panalghuta	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
panasiigh-	gfyfc74-	prepare spear for striking															to prepare spear for striking		< pana-?-		CK Rub. 405		panasigh-	panasxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
panegh-	gfys4-	starve to death		paneghtuq \'91he starved to death\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91it burned (up)\'92; paanghaa \'91it burned (up)\'92 / paneghsighaa \'91he starved it/him\'92; paanghumaaq \'91he has starved\'92; paneghtaqsaghiit tuqukam aatkiillu saghyangillu qamagluki \'91long ago they used to burn up all of the clothing and other belongings of one who had died\'92	burn, burn up												to starve to death; to burn; to burn up		PE pan03-				panegh-	panegh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 -\
paneghte-	gfys5ns-	burn (it)		paneghtaa \'91he burned, fried or stir-fried it\'92 / paneghtiiq \'91he burned or (stir-)fried something\'92	fry (it)	stir-fry (it)											to burn (it); to fry or stir-fry (it)		< panegh-te\super 1\nosupersub -				paneghte-	paneghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
panelleq	gfysk]s2	ash			burned spot	scar from burning											ash; burned spot; scar from burning		< panegh-lleq				panelleq	panelleq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
pangaleg-	gf3fksu-	run on four legs (of animals) with front legs hitting the ground simultaneously		pangalegtuq \'91it ran\'92 /													to run on four legs (of animals) with front legs hitting the ground simultaneously		PE pa&al0!-				pangaleg-	pangaleg-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
pangalegti-	gf3fks[nb-	go fast with dogteam		pangalegtiiq \'91he went fast\'92 /	dogteam (go fast with a ~)												to go fast with dogteam		< pangaleg-te\super 1\nosupersub -i\super 1				\nosupersub pangalegti-	pangalegti-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 -\
pangalgusiq	gf3fkuecb2	snow-machine		
\f2\i slang;
\f0\i0  
\f2\i used in the dual
\f0\i0 , pangalgusik,
\f2\i  for one snow-machine													
\f0\i0 snow-machine		< pangaleg-(u)siq				pangalgusiq	pangalgusiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
pangalwaagh-	gf3fk164-	trot															to trot		< pangaleg-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 2\nosupersub -		VK\'92s notes		pangalwagh-	pangalwxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
pangeghte-	gf3s5ns-	trip (take ~ to Chukotka from St. Lawrence Is.)		pangeghtuq \'91he took a trip to Chukotka\'92 / pangeghhnaqukut \'91we are going to take a trip to Chukotka\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  pangeq	go to Chukotka from St. Lawrence Is.	Chukotka (go to ~ from St. Lawrence Is.)											to take a trip to Chukotka from St. Lawrence Is.		PE pa&03- (?)				pangeghte-	pangeghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pangeq	hf3s2	visitor from Chukotka to St. Lawrence Is.		Ellnginaamta naten pangeghtukut, 
\f2\i paangghet
\f0\i0  maliglluki. \'91We were the only ones form here  how went to Chukotka accompanying the 
\f2\i visitors from Chukotka
\f0\i0  [on their way home].\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:108); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  pangeghte-													visitor from Chukotka to St. Lawrence Is.						pangeq	pangeq	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1179 \
pangquqe-	gf32e2s-	check on (go ~)		qavngaghhaaneng nengyuun pangquqaghsigasigu? \'91how long has it been since you paid a visit to your grandmother?\'92; pangquqnaqaput angyat aviilnguut \'91we are going out to check on the boat that hasn't come back in yet\'92	visit (pay a ~ to)	check the ones left behind											to go check on; to pay a visit to; to check the ones left behind						pangquqe-	pangquqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
panigkaq	gfyb[rf2	stepdaughter			daughter (step~)	adopted daughter											stepdaughter; adopted daughter		< panik-kaq				panigkaq	panigkaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
panignaq	gfybuyf2	daughter, favorite		Elngaatall agghiyugneghllak, ama aaghhneghllugllak. Angayuqani, anglegutnillu pinighqesiigalkangi. Naqam 
\f2\i panignaghllak
\f0\i0 . \'91She was very strong-willed and stubborn. She didn\'92t act well toward her parents and her siblings. This was a consequence of the fact that she was the 
\f2\i favorite daughter.
\f0\i0 \'92 (KIILUUQ 1)													favorite daughter		< panik-?-				panignaq	panignaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
panik	gfybr	daughter		paniga \'91his daughter\'92; panilguunga ataasimeng \'91I have one daughter\'92													daughter		PE pani!				panik	panik	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1082 \
panilqusiq	gfybk]2ecb2	daughter  (12-16 year old)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 daughter  (12-16 years of age)	ljxm (12-16 ktn)			CK V & E 73		panilqusiq	panilqusiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
paninang	gfybyf3	still		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Upenghaagunguq, ughukestaghaqa 
\f2\i paninang
\f0\i0  nalighnegha anigulwaaqluni, \'91It is said that it is spring, the snow was melting, and there was 
\f2\i still
\f0\i0  snow in some areas,\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. II:14); Iteghyalghiiminguq nengyughhaa 
\f2\i paninang
\f0\i0  qavaghaqeftuq. \'91When he went inside his little grandmother was 
\f2\i still
\f0\i0  sleeping.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:14)	more												still; more		from Chukchi panena \'91as before; previous, former\'92				paninang	paninang	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \
paniraaq	gfybh62	daughter from a temporary wife		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 daughter from a temporary wife		< panik-raaq		CK Rub. 405		paniraq	panirxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
panqallag-	gfy2fk]zu-	char		nuyan panqallagaa, uyavaghqaaghi \'91your hair is becoming scorched, move further away\'92; leghlleghem melquvleghaa siipneq panqallaglluku ikughhu gaaghvagilgavgu \'91singe off the remaining fine fuzz from the goose before you cook it\'92	smolder	scorch								singe			to char; to smolder; to scorch; to singe		< panegh\super 2\nosupersub -?-				panqallag-	panqallag-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 -\
panqugni-	gfy2euyb-	complain of having little in order to evoke pity															to complain of having little in order to evoke pity				VK\'92s notes		panqugni-	panqugni-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 -\
panquugni-	gfy2euyb-	pretend to be poorer		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 stingy (be ~)												to pretend to be poorer than one is; to be stingy	ghb,tlyzncz\\  crfhtlybxfnm			CK V & E 153		panqugni-	panqxgni-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 -\
panrengi-	gfyhs3b-	get closer to see what is happening		atulghiinun panrengiighsaquma \'91I should go watch the drumming\'92; esnami igleghteghngaaghmi sangwaa iigna panrengitkesaqminigu neghsaq mallu \'91while he was travelling along the shore, he got closer to something that he saw and found out it was a seal carcass\'92													to get closer to see what is happening				CK A & W 70		panrengi-	panrengi-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1088 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 -\
panrengi-	gfyhs3b-	look more closely at something															to look more closely at something				VK\'92s notes		panrengi-	panrengi-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1088 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 -\
papa	gfgf	pepper		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka; used in the dual,
\f0\i0  papak, 
\f2\i for pepper in, and with, the pepper container													
\f0\i0 pepper		from English \'91pepper\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i (V&E94)		
\f0\i0 papa	papa	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \
papaghnaq	gfgf4yf2	meat (boiled dried ~ stored with fat in sealskin bag in preparation for winter)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf. 
\f0\i0 papi													boiled dried meat stored with fat in sealskin bag in preparation for winter				CK Rub 406		papaghnaq	papaghnaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
papalghutaq	gfgfk4enf2	pepper shaker or other container		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  papalghutak,
\f2\i  for one container													
\f0\i0 pepper shaker or other container		< papa-lghutaq				papalghutaq	papalghutaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
papallugh-	gfgfk]/4-	twitch		papallughtuq \'91it twitched, fidgeted, acted excitedly\'92 /	fidget	excitedly (act ~)											to twitch; to fidget; to act excitedly						papallugh-	papallugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
papasqitagh-	gfgfc2bnf4-	move tail back and forth (of a fish (or whale?))															to move tail back and forth (of a fish (or whale?))		< papasquq-?		whale and play added from CK Rub 406		papasqitagh-	papasqitagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
papasquq	gfgfc2e2	fish tail		papasqwa \'91its tail\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 papek	baleen (narrow end of ~)												fish tail; narrow end of baleen				2nd gloss from Rub 406		papasquq	papasquq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
papeghaq	gfgs4f2	hill alongside a moutain		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E); cf.
\f0\i0  papek													hill alongside a moutain	[jkv. ghbvsrf/obq r ujht			CK V & E 43; Rub 406		papeghaq	papeghaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
papek	gfgsr	tail of land mammal		paapga \'91its tail\'92													tail of land mammal		PE pap0!				papek	papek	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \
papekullutaq	gfgsrek]/nf2	tail of bird		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 papekullutat
\f2\i , for one tail													
\f0\i0 tail of bird	[djcn gnbws			CK Rub. 406		papekullutaq	papekullutaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
papelek	gfgsksr	wolf (shaman\'92s word)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); literally 
\f0\i0 \'91one with a tail\'92													wolf (shaman\'92s word)				CK Rub 406		papelek	papelek	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
paperaghte-	gfgshf5ns-	wag the tail		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  = paperagti-	swish the tail												to wag the tail; to swish the tail		< papek-?-				paperaghte-	paperaghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
paperegte-	gfgshsns-	wag the tail		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  = paperagti-	swish the tail												to wag the tail; to swish the tail		< papek-?-				paperegte-	paperegte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
papgiiraq	gfg[7hf2	tail (one with a short ~ or no ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 one with a short tail or no tail	rewsq. ,tc[djcnsq	< papek-?		CK Rub. 406		papgiraq	papgxraq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1093 \u1251 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
papi	gfyb	dried seal meat that had been cooked and stored in a sealskin poke with seal oil		ayumiq kagpagnaqneghmegteki ilangi nefkumeng papiqegkangit \'91in the old days when they stored their dried seal meat, they would put them in sealskin pokes with seal oil\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 papaghnaq													dried seal meat that had been cooked and stored in a sealskin poke with seal oil				CK A & W 70		papi	papi	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
paprangi	gfgif3b	vigor		siivanlleghet paprangi ivaqayugaat anglinghhani awen sami piyaqniighmi angyami taayughqemmi aneghneghqutkennalghiit qepgharakegtat \'91the elders usually look for quickness in young men as it is an asset when confronting danger while hunting at sea\'92	quickness												vigor; quickness						paprangi	paprangi	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1096 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \
paprangite-	gfgif3bns-	quick (be ~)		paprangituq \'91he moves fast\'92 / paprangilnguut unitiituut aqfaqumi \'91active people win the races\'92	vigorous (be ~)	active (be ~)								move fast			to be quick, vigorous or active; to move fast		< paprangi-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -				paprangite-	paprangite-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1096 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
papri-	gfgib-	fidget		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  paprangi													to fidget		PE pap9i-				papri-	papri-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1087 \u1096 \u1080 -\
paqna-	gf2y]f-	apprehensive		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  paqnakaa \'91he is apprehensive of the danger he (another) might be in, worried about him\'92; paqnanaghtuq \'91he is in a worrisome position\'92; paqnayugtuq \'91he feels endangered\'92; paqnakluku sikunghhaq unitaa salin sigugruganeng \'91being apprehensive of its danger he left the fresh sea ice which looked dark and somewhat transparent\'92; paqnanaghtuq meghem un'gum sikunga qanigughneghhaanghani \'91the sea ice is particularly dangerous right after a snowfall\'92	danger (wary of ~)	worried								concerned			apprehensive; wary of danger; worried; concerned		PE paqna-				paqna-	paqna-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 -\
paqnamiqe-	gf2y]fvb2s-	escape peril		paqnamiquq \'91he barely avoided peril\'92; paqnamiqaa \'91he warned or frightened him into avoiding peril\'92	barely avoid peril	warn or frighten one so that he will avoid peril								peril (escape or barely avoid a ~)			to escape or barely avoid peril; to warn or frighten one so that he will avoid peril 		< paqna-miqe-				paqnamiqe-	paqnamiqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
paqnan	gf2y]fy	weapon			protection												weapon; protection		< paqna-(u)n				paqnan	paqnan	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1085 \
paqnasigh-	gf2y]fcb4-	aid (come to someone\'92s ~ to prevent injury)															to come to someone\'92s aid to prevent injury		paqna-sigh-		VK\'92s notes		paqnasigh-	paqnasigh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
paqniite-	gf2y]7ns-	foolhardy (be ~)			chances (take ~)												to be foolhardy; to take chances		< paqna-(ng)ite-				paqnite-	paqnxte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
paqugaghte-	gf2euf5ns-	come off		tuguta iiknaqluku paqugaghsimakanga maayghaaghan tungangakun \'91when he tried to take off the ivory tusk, it came off at the base\'92; ayumiq uyghaget savigtaghqat paqugaghtaghluki paanistaqiit \'91long ago, when they made knives, they would use stone flaking it first\'92; neghighluku uyghaget savigtaghqat paqugaghtaghluki paanistaqiit \'91years ago rocks were split and shaped for knives\'92													to come off				CK A & W 70		paqugaghte-	paqugaghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
paqumiyug-	gf2evb/u-	wary of and hesitate to act due to threatening weather (be ~)		anuqataghaaghhnayukagu paqumiyugluteng angyallghisimalghiit \'91they thought it might be getting windy, so they held off and decided not to go boating\'92; paqumiyugluni uteghsimalghii tevraneng pagkengughsagu \'91being wary of threatening weather he came back in from hunting on the ice because the wind was blowing out to sea from the shore\'92													to be wary of and hesitate to act due to threatening weather				CK A & W 70		paqumiyug-	paqumiyug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1102 \u1075 -\
para	gfhf	butter		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka; 
\f0\i0 Neqekranglliit 
\f2\i parameng
\f0\i0  piiqluteng. Elngaatall kepsughluta neghluta. \'91The bread was spread with 
\f2\i butter
\f0\i0 . We ate until we were very full.\'92 (PANGEGH. 33)													butter		from English \'91butter\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R406, V&E94)		
\f0\i0 para	para	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \
paraaghniigh-	gfh64y74-	ask for (needed item(s))		tuquuqanka nuulghiit aatak uvilighnemnnun paraaghniiqaghlanga \'91I\'92m running short on nails, so I\'92m going to go ask our neighbors for some \'92; paraaghniighlunga llaaghanwha pikengunga \'91I asked for some, indeed, I got some\'92													to ask for (needed item(s))		from English \'91borrow\'92 and postbase -niigh-	SLI	CK A & W 70		paraghnigh-	parxghnxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
paseghaq	gfcs4f2	frost on skin boat															frost on skin boat		PE pat0t- (?)				paseghaq	paseghaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
paseraq	gfcshf2	edible root type		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 edible root type				CK Rub 407		paseraq	paseraq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
pasike-	gfcbrs-	blame		pasikaa \'91he blamed her\'92 /	fault (find ~ with)	accuse											to blame; to find fault with; to accuse		PE paci-				pasike-	pasike-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
pasineq	gfcbys2	frame		pasingha \'91its frame\'92	body	window frame											frame; body; window frame						pasineq	pasineq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
pasingatke-	gfcb3fnrs-	interested in (be ~)		ellngan pasingatkaqaa qepghaq angyaghpagmi \'91he is interested in the work of ships\'92													to be interested in	bynthtcjdfnm					pasingatke-	pasingatke-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
pasinguk	gfcb3er	face (area of ~ to the side of the nose near the nostril)		aghnam taam pasingugkek kavighllaguuk \'91that woman's nose area is all red\'92	nose area												area of face to the side of the nose near the nostril		PE maci!				pasinguk	pasinguk	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1082 \

\f1\b pasketa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gfcrsnf\super s	\nosupersub basket		Enkaam qerngughlluki imiqiit qula maalghuk siipneqluku 
\f2\i pasketet
\f0\i0  siipneghitneng tallimat neqekrangllat. \'91And they filled twelve 
\f2\i baskets
\f0\i0  with the remainer of the five loaves.\'92 (John 6.13)													basket		from English \'91basket\'92	SLI			pasketae	pasketae	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \
pasleghhughagh-	gfckps5e4f4-	hint to be given something		pasleghhughalghii aqupileghyagulluku tuunumakanga \'91they got tired of him hinting around so they gave him some\'92													to hint to be given something				CK A & W 70		pasleghhughagh-	pasleghhughagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1083 \u1079 \u1099 \u1203 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
paslitaq	gfck]bnf2	wedge for splitting wood															wedge for splitting wood						paslitaq	paslitaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
patag-	gfnfu-	pat lightly		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  pateg-	knock on something												to pat lightly; to knock on something		PE patta!-				patag-	patag-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 -\
patagagh-	gfnfuf4-	pat or knock repeatedly 		patagalghii qakemna qelpeghutigu \'91open the door for whoever it is that is knocking out there\'92	clap												to repeatedly pat or knock; clap		< patag-?-		2nd gloss CK 407		patagagh-	patagagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
patala	gfnfkz	however it wasn't possible to do as asked		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  manimeng aapfiksaghaanga patala \'91he asked me for money but I didn't have any\'92													however it wasn't possible to do as asked						patala	patala	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
patalaa-	gfnfk6-	need (be in desperate ~)		patalaalhii uquqraggiinnilukek egllugteng uqungusimkanga \'91she was in desperate need of stove oil so he bought her some\'92	desperately need something												to be in desperate need		< patala-?-		VK\'92s notes		patala-	patalx-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u257 -\
pateg-	gfnsu-	hit with palm of hand		paatgaa \'91he slapped it or him\'92 / paatgu qikmiq taana neghnaqii neqet \'91slapped that dog that is about to eat the food\'92; avlaawaataq paatgaa qevuulluku repall avlaawa tengaasluku alngunak \'91he slapped the flour sack hard enough that a cloud of flour rose in the air\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  patag-	slap												to hit with palm of hand; to slap						pateg-	pateg-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 -\

\f1\b pategh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gfns4-\'a1	drain		pateghtuq \'91it dried up\'92 / meq ellngaqayugem qulmesiitem taam imaqsaqanga paatghumaaq \'91the water that was in that pot that leaks has all drained out\'92; ellnga paatghumaaq aqnim \'91he is exhausted from pain\'92	dry up	evaporate								exhausted or tired (be ~)			to drain; to dry up; to evaporate; to be exhausted or tired						pategh-1	pategh-1	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub pategh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gfns4-\'99			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > pateghneq, pateghtu-																			pategh-2	pategh-2	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub pateghneq	gfns4ys2	width															width		< pategh\super 2\nosupersub -neq\super 2				\nosupersub pateghneq	pateghneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
pateghte-	gfns5ns-	absorb		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to absorb	dcfcsdfnm. dgbnsdfnm	< pategh\super 1\nosupersub -te\super 1\nosupersub -		CK Rub. 408 		pateghte-	pateghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pateghtu-	gfns5ne-	wide (be ~)		pateghtuuq \'91it is wide\'92 / ulluviiq taana pateghtuuqlu umuuqlu \'91that board is wide and thick\'92; pateghtulkelluku unaghsiq unitaa \'91he considered the log to be too wide so he left it\'92													to be wide		< pategh\super 2\nosupersub -tu-				pateghtu-	pateghtu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 -\
pateghtutala	gfns5nenfkz	width															width		< pateghtu-tala				pateghtutala	pateghtutala	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
pategmig-	gfnsuvbu-	drive off by slapping		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  mekelghiighem pategmigaqii sugrugpallengenghat (sugukelengiighet) \'91the boy is driving off the mosquitoes by slapping at them\'92													to drive off by slapping		< pateg-?-		CK Rub. 408		pategmig-	pategmig-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
pateq	gfns2	marrow		Quyngim 
\f2\i paatghaneng
\f0\i0  saghnaanga gaaghusighqameng. \'91I saved some reindeer 
\f2\i marrow
\f0\i0  for cooking.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 128)	core of tree or plant	graphite of pencil											marrow; core of tree or plant; graphite of pencil		PE pat03		gloss 2, 3 CK Rub. 408		pateq	pateq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \
patgutaq	gfn[enf2	racket-like device used in traditional game		= paatgutaq	tennis racket												racket-like device used in traditional game; tennis racket		PE pat!uta3 (under PE pat0!-); < pateg-(u)taq				patgutaq	patgutaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
pati-	gfnb-	crack bones and eat the marrow within		una ighu patinaqaqa \'91I'm going to crack this legbone for the marrow\'92													to crack bones and eat the marrow within		< pateq-i\super 2\nosupersub -				pati-	pati-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1080 -\
patilngu-	gfnbk3e-	ache (of bones)		talligni patilnguniiqaak \'91he says that his arm-bones are hurting\'92													to ache (of  bone)		pateq-?-		CK A & W 71		patilngu-	patilngu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 -\
patime-	gfnbvs-	flap wings while on the surface of the water		patimuq \'91it is flapping its wings\'92 / Meghqun nalugigalnguq, alingruughtuq.  Sanitmun 
\f2\i patimllaluni
\f0\i0  quutmun uugtuq. \'91Having never landed in the water he was terrified. He 
\f2\i flapped his wings
\f0\i0  until he got up on dry land.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:234)													to flap wings while on the surface of the water						patime-	patime-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1080 \u1084 \u1099 -\
patimlla-	gfnbvk]z-	flap wings at intervals		patimllaaq \'91it is flapping its wings at intervals\'92 / 													to flap wings at intervals		< patime-?-				patimlla-	patimlla-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1080 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 -\
patug-	gfneu-	become covered with a sheet of ice		patugtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  patugaa \'91it got covered with ice\'92 /													to become covered with a sheet of ice		PE patu!				patug-	patug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 -\
patugnaq	gfneuyf2	frosty weather			freezing rain												frosty weather; freezing rain		< patug-naq				patugnaq	patugnaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
patuk	gfner	crust of frost			frost (crust of ~)												crust of frost		PE patu!				patuk	patuk	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \
pawiilae	gf17kfs	butt of gun		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check exact pronunciation and spelling				butt of gun		from Chukchi pawel!0n \'91thigh, hip, butt of gun\'92	14	deR. 353; Rub. 408		pawilae	pawxlae	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1265 \u1251 \u1083 \u1072 \u1099 \
payaaqae	gf92fs	calf of leg			boot (woman's fancy knee-high bleached sealskin ~)												calf of leg; woman's fancy knee-high bleached sealskin boot		from proto-Chukotko-Kamchatkan payaqal&0n (Koryak payaqal&0n; Chukchi paaqal!0n) \'91calf of leg\'92	10, 14			payaqae	payxqae	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \u1072 \u1099 \
payaaqe-	gf92s-	put on woman's fancy knee-high bleached sealskin boot			wear woman's fancy knee-high bleached sealskin boot												to put on or wear woman's fancy knee-high bleached sealskin boot						payaqe-	payxqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b paya\super e1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gfzs\'a1	opening (outer edge of ~)		paaynga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  payangani \'91at its mouth or opening\'92; 
\f2\i dual
\f0\i0 , payek, 
\f2\i often used for one opening especially when unpossessed;
\f0\i0  Kiiwegnun kaalluta 
\f2\i payek
\f0\i0  aghqestaaghhaaftuk iveghluta aghvightukut. \'91When we got to the river the 
\f2\i mouth
\f0\i0  evidently was shallow and so we crossed by wading.\'92 (Akiingqwagh. 116); Ayapghaatak aanneghmeng aghtughagka, qayughllak 
\f2\i paaskek
\f0\i0  kagpestaapiguuk. \'91I couldn\'92t put on the mittens because their 
\f2\i cuffs
\f0\i0  were too narrow.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 71)	mouth of river, den or passageway	enrance (area near ~)								hatch of kayak			outer part edge of opening; mouth of river, den or passageway; area near entrance; hatch of kayak; opening		PE pa90-		Akiingqwaghneghet 116	; > payek, paaskaghqaq, paasliq	payae1	payae1	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1103 \u1099 1\

\f1\b paya\super e2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gfzs\'99	dipnet made of baleen		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf. 
\f0\i0 paya\super e1													\nosupersub dipnet made of baleen	j,hex bp rbnjuj ecf e cfxrf			CK Rub. 409		payae2	payae2	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1103 \u1099 2\
Payaghutfak	Gfz4enafr	Powooiliak (site on coast north from ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on coast north from Powooiliak on St. Lawrence Is.						Payaghutfak	Payaghutfak	\uc0\u1055 \u1072 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1092 \u1072 \u1082 \
payangite-	gfz3bns-	St. Lawrence Islanders visit Chukotka		payangituq \'91the St. Lawrence Islanders are here (in Chukotka)\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91the Chukotkans are here (in St. Lawrence Island)\'92; Elngaatall upenghaanneghani 
\f2\i payanginneghani
\f0\i0  naavghutkayugyugaghtuuq liisalghiinga. \'91I recall that whenever it was spring there would be lots of trading 
\f2\i whenever people came over from the other side
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:16)	Chukotkans visit St. Lawrence Island	other side (people come over from the ~)											for St. Lawrence Islanders to be visiting (Chukotka) or for Chukotkans to be visiting (St. Lawrence Island); people come over from the other side						payangite-	payangite-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1103 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
payegh-	gfqs4-	meet partway		paayghaa \'91he met her partway\'92 / paayghiiq \'91he is met someone partway\'92; paayghutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  met each other partway\'92; payeghnaqaqa, akmagllagluni ayuquq \'91I am going out to meet him as he is carrying a large bag\'92; paasghu \'91go meet and help him\'92	go to meet or  help (someone approaching the house or the village)	help (someone approaching the house or the village)											to meet partway; to go to meet or to help (someone approaching the house or the village)		PE pa903-				payegh-	payegh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 -\
payeghmun	gfqs4vey	against the grain		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 facing eachother												against the grain; facing eachother		< payegh-
\f2\i terminalis		
\f0\i0 VK\'92s notes		payeghmun	payeghmun	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
payghiiqute-	gfq472ens-	challenge in a spear throwing contest															to challenge in a spear throwing contest						payghiqute-	payghxqute-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1253 \u1271 \u1251 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
payghumiigh-	gfq4ev74-	go towards each other		panallghiinnguq uutqiighulluteng enraq payghumiighusimalghiit \'91it is said that when they challenged each other with spears, they would go backwards, and then they would walk towards each other\'92; piiqiit, aghveghem qiivluki payghumiighii \'91they say that the whale turned and it (and the boat) went towards each other\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  payegh-													to go towards each other				CK A & W 71		payghumigh-	payghumxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1253 \u1271 \u1091 \u1084 \u1251 \u1271 -\

\f1\b payugte-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gf/[ns-\'a1	go check on (him/her) concerning (his/her) well-being		payugtaa \'91he checked on her\'92 / payugtiiq \'91he checked on someone\'92	check on concerning (his/her) well-being												to go check on (him/her) concerning (his/her) well-being		PE payu!-				payugte-1	payugte-1	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub payugte-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gf/[ns-\'99	raise the head from a lying position		payuglluni esghapagaa tugutaa amigem saam amakenganeng qiipekestaqanga \'91he raised his head and watched the doorknob slowly turn from the outside\'92													to raise the head from a lying position						payugte-2	payugte-2	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub payukagh-	gf/rf4-	check briefly			look in on												to check briefly; to look in on		< payugte\super 1\nosupersub -kaghaq				payukagh-	payukagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
payukagh-	gf/rf4-	raise one\'92s head and then lower it															to raise one\'92s head and then lower it		< payugte\super 2\nosupersub -kaghaq				payukagh-	payukagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
paywaaqe-	gfq162s-	hesitant (feel ~ due to anticipated difficulties)		paywaaquq \'91he feels hesitant to try\'92 /	frustrated (feel ~ due to anticipated difficulties)	hopeless (feel ~ due to anticipated difficulties)											to feel hesitant, frustrated or hopeless due to anticipated difficulties						paywaqe-	paywxqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 -\
paywaaqeke-	gfq162srs-	hesitant (feel ~ about (it))		payuwaaqekaa \'91he feels hesitant, unsure, hopeless about it\'92 /	unsure (feel ~ about (it))	frustrated (feel ~ about (it))								hopeless (feel ~ about (it))			to feel hesitant, unsure, frustrated or hopeless about (it)		< paywaaqe-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				paywaqeke-	paywxqeke-	\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 -\
Pegetkaq	Gsusnrf2	Kookoolik Hill on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kookoolik Hill on St. Lawrence Is.						Pegetkaq	Pegetkaq	\uc0\u1055 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
peggaghtugh-	gs[f5ne4-	stay up late		peggaghtughtuq kakinaluni \'91she stayed up late to sew\'92	late (stay up ~)												to stay up late		< pegge-aghtugh- (?)		VK\'92s notes		peggaghtugh-	peggaghtugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
pegge-	gs[s-	stay awake all night		pegguq \'91he stayed up all night\'92 /													to stay awake all night		PE p0!0!a3-				pegge-	pegge-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1099 -\
peggusiq	gs[ecb2	clothing not worn at night		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); perhaps meaning clothing not usually worn for sleep													
\f0\i0 clothing not worn at night		< pegge-(u)siq		CK Rub 434		peggusiq	peggusiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
pegh-	gs4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > peghlaaghwaq, peghlegh-, peghte-																			pegh-	pegh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1271 -\
peghh-	gs5-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > peghhigh-, peghhuq																			peghh-	peghh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 -\
peghhe-	gs5s-	squat down from exhaustion and cold		igleghlleghhiit taakluku, taagani qenwat ataasiq peghhuq \'91they were traving a long distance, finally one of them gave up because he was tired\'92	give up from exhaustion and cold												to squat down (and give up) from exhaustion or cold		PE p030-		CK A & W 71		peghhe-	peghhe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1099 -\
peghhigh-	gs5b4-	wash one\'92s hands		peghhightuq \'91he washed his (own) hands\'92; peghhighaa \'91he washed his (another's) hands\'92 / peghhii! \'91wash your hands!\'92													to wash one\'92s hands		PE 0p3i3- and 0p3it- (under PE 0p03); < peghh-(ng)igh-				peghhigh-	peghhigh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1080 \u1271 -\
peghhiisiq	gs57cb2	hand washing implement such as towel, water or soap		peghhiisiiguq meq taana \'91that water is for washing hands\'92; una veglluk peghhiisiiwalluu? \'91is this towel for hand-washing too?\'92	towel	water for hand-washing								soap			hand washing implement such as towel, water or soap		< peghhigh-(u)siq				peghhisiq	peghhxsiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
peghhuq	gs5e2	grime, moist (such as dirt, oil, blood or grime from food)		peghhughtuuq \'91he has lots of grime (on his hands)\'92													moist grime (such as dirt, oil, blood or grime from food)		 < peghh-?-				peghhuq	peghhuq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1091 \u1179 \
peghhuughqe-	gs5852s-	dirty one\'92s hands		peghhuughquq neqekrangllaghyaghqameng akuulluni \'91she got her hands dirty when making dough for biscuits\'92	get one's hands dirty												to get one's hands dirty		< peghhuq-(ng)ughte-?-				peghhughqe-	peghhxghqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
peghlaaghwaq	gs4k941f2	contest (traditional men's ~ where competitors crouch down and jump to a drumbeat until exhausted)															traditional men's contest where competitors crouch down and jump to a drumbeat until exhausted		< pegh-?-				peghlaghwaq	peghlxghwaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
peghlegh-	gs4ks4-	squat		peghleghtuq \'91he squatted\'92, \'91it is bent from the cold\'92 / tiintat peghleghtut nunmaawhaq \'91the tent collapsed slowly\'92; atkuk tawatengwaaq kumlaaghqegkaq aalluni ayuqelghiistun ughugutkelluku peghleghtuq \'91the stiffly frozen parka that looks as though it were a person is collapsing as it thaws\'92; iiggenka peghleghtut \'91my fingers are stiff from the cold\'92; peghleghlluni iighaghtuumalghii \'91he bent down and stayed hidden\'92	collapse	bent or stiff from cold (be ~)								paralyzed in the legs (be ~)			to squat; to collapse; to be bent or stiff from cold; to be paralyzed in the legs		PE p03l03-; < pegh-?-				peghlegh-	peghlegh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
peghleghte-	gs4ks5ns-	numb (become ~)		sapeghhnam peghleghsimii ellngan iiggi \'91the extreme cold caused his hands to become numb\'92													to become numb				CK Rub 428		peghleghte-	peghleghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
peghneq	gs4ys2	bending (place where ~ occurs)			joint	inside of joint											place where bending occurs; joint; inside of joint		< pegh-neq\super 2\nosupersub ; PE p03n03 (under PE p030-)				peghneq	peghneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
peghqigh-	gs52b4-	study		peghqightuq \'91he trained\'92 / peghqightaa \'91he trained her\'92; peghqiimaaq \'91he is trained\'92; taghnughhaat peghqightut sukalluteng elngaatall igaghyami whani kiyaghlleghmi \'91children learn quickly how to live in school here\'92	practice	train								learn			to study; to practice; to train; to learn						peghqigh-	peghqigh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1271 -\
peghqigsagh-	gs52b[cz4-	train (practice)		Tawatetkaagut pingayuneng qavaghlluki peghqighaqut 
\f2\i peghqigsaqanka
\f0\i0 . \'91For three days they practiced; I 
\f2\i trained
\f0\i0  them.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:90)	practice	drill (practice)											to train; to practice; to drill		< peghqigh-?-		VK\'92s notes & in texts		peghqigsagh-	peghqigsagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
peghqiiraagh-	gs527h64-	fold over several times		aghvigat aatkat peghqiiraaghluki llilaghtughii \'91she folded the washed clothes a few times and put them away\'92; kangsughnayukan peghqiiraaghluku kanaghtaa \'91in case it wouldn\'92t fit, she folded it a few times and put it in\'92													to fold over several times				CK A & W 71		peghqiragh-	peghqxrxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1251 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
peghqiiragh-	gs527hf4-	fold over and over															to fold over and over		peghte-?-		VK\'92s notes		peghqiragh-	peghqxragh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1251 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
peghqinegh-	gs52bys4-	wise (be ~)		peghqinghutmineng yugem taakut teglegughtet tugulaghtestii maateghaq umiilegnun \'91by being very clever that person enabled the authorities to quickly catch the thieves\'92; peghqiniqutkaa \'91he turned his cleverness toward accomplishing it\'92	clever (be ~)												to be wise; to be clever						peghqinegh-	peghqinegh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 -\
peghqinelleq	gs52bysk]s2	wisdom		
\f2\i used in Bible translation													
\f0\i0 wisdom		< peghqinegh-lleq				peghqinelleq	peghqinelleq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
peghqineq	gs52bys2	wise person or animal			clever person or animal												wise or clever person or animal						peghqineq	peghqineq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
peghqiniqe-	gs52byb2s-	sly (be ~)			tricky (be ~)												to be sly; to be tricky		< peghqineq-liqe-				peghqiniqe-	peghqiniqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
peghqipaari-	gs52bg6hb-	expert (become ~)															to become expert		< peghqigh-?-				peghqipari-	peghqipxri-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u257 \u1088 \u1080 -\
peghte-	gs5ns-	fold over		peghtuq \'91he bent over\'92; peghtaa \'91he bent it over / aghnalqwaaghllakat kiyang peghngaghmeng igleghtaqut \'91elderly women usually walk bent over; peghtaa igaq qukaakun \'91he folded the paper over in the middle\'92; maalghugegneng peghtigu \'91fold it twice\'92	bend over												to fold over; to bend over		PE p030t- (under PE p030-); < pegh-te\super 1\nosupersub -				peghte-	peghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
peghtu-	gs5ne-	overwhelmed		
\f2\i emotional root: 
\f0\i0 peghtukaa \'91he feels overwhelmed by it\'92; peghtuyugtuq \'91he feels overwhelmed\'92; peghtunaghtuq \'91it is overwhelming\'92; aghnam esghaghluku anengaghmi ighnegha esghiigalkenni ima aawhkaghhaaneng elgnaatall peghtukamakanga \'91when the lady saw her brother's son whom she had not seen for some time she was overcome by emotion seeing how much he had grown\'92													overwhelmed						peghtu-	peghtu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 -\
peghu-	gs4e-	bury		peghwaa \'91he buried it\'92 / peghuluki tuqukat kiyang lliighumiit maaten taakwani nunamillu \'91they bury the dead (rather than treating them in other ways) mostly now in that place too\'92; siiflukek pughukek unkusek anigukun qepghapafqaayek tepeluughqepaglleqagken kaviighet naaghyakumegteggu tepelluk awavaghsaghwaaghllequt \'91set the trap and put it in the dug out spot in the snow and bury it without handling it too much since that would make it smell strange and foxes would avoid it\'92	inter	cover over with (especially with earth or snow)											to bury; to inter; to cover over (especially with earth or snow)		PE p03u(-)				peghu-	peghu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 -\
peghwaaghi-	gs4164b-	bury food to age or store it															to bury food to age or store it		< peghwaaq-?-i\super 2\nosupersub -				peghwaghi-	peghwxghi-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1080 -\
peghwaaq	gs4162	buried or covered thing		peghwaaghet uksaaq tepat saghnaaghenka taginnaqanka \'91I am going to bring out the sea vegetables that were buried under the sand last fall\'92; neqem ilangi peghwaaghwaaqut neqnitun aghyiisqelluku \'91some foods are buried so that they'll age and become tasty\'92; sangufta taana peghwaaq aliighqegkaat? \'91what was that buried thing they unearthed?\'92	stored or aged underground (thing ~)												something buried or covered; something stored or aged underground		< peghu-aq				peghwaq	peghwxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
peghyi	gs4qb	snowdrift on the way after a storm		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E)													
\f0\i0 snowdrift on the way after a storm	ceuhj, yf ljhjut			CK V & E 27; Rub 428		peghyi	peghyi	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1253 \u1080 \
peghyugh-	gs4m/4-	sleepy (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  = paghyugh-	tired (be ~)												to be tired; to be sleepy						peghyugh-	peghyugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
peglleghqe-	gs[k]s52s-	separate fighting people or animals		= peglleghqute-													to separate fighting people or animals		< pegte-?-				peglleghqe-	peglleghqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
peglleghqute-	gs[k]s52ens-	separate fighting people or animals		peglleghqutuk pillugullutek \'91after fighting they\sub 2\nosupersub  disengaged from each other\'92; Piyaalghiinga, pillugutaqeftuk  kayngek. Tagnelghii  enkaam qatelghii. Upughpenanga, 
\f2\i peglleghqutagka
\f0\i0 . \'91As I was out taking a walk, there were two bears fighting. A dark one and a light one. Without quavering I 
\f2\i separated
\f0\i0  them.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 39); = peglleghqe-													to separate fighting people or animals		< pegte-?-				peglleghqute-	peglleghqute-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pegnefqagh-	gsuysa2f4-	almost finish or do something		college-valleni uumi upenghami pegnefqaghaa kaspugemmeng \'91she almosed finished college this spring\'92													to almost finish or do something		< pegnem-?-		VK\'92s notes		pegnefqagh-	pegnefqagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1092 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pegnefqe-	gsuysa2s-	miss but not by much		angyat aghveghmeng pegnefqaasimalghiit \'91a boat almost got to a whale (to strike it)\'92; yugem naagsani pegnefqaquluku qenwat unakumakanga \'91a man kept on almost hitting his target, then finally he hit it\'92	hit (almost ~ the spot at which one is aiming)	almost hit the spot at which one is aiming											to miss but not by much; to almost hit the spot at which one is aiming				CK A & W 72		pegnefqe-	pegnefqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1092 \u1179 \u1099 -\
pegnem	gsuysv	difficulty (with great ~)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  nasaperani ifkaghyan meghmun pegnem tugumakanga \'91when his cap fell into the water he retrieved it with great difficulty\'92; pegnem igaa aliituq \'91its design barely shows\'92; Tuqusaqegka nanughrukutaaghllak, uqigllak 
\f2\i pegnem
\f0\i0  neveghtekaqaqa. \'91When I killed it, (it turned out that) it was a really big one. It was very heavy, I 
\f2\i barely and with difficulty
\f0\i0  was able to lay on its back.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:176) 	barely (just ~)												with great difficulty; just barely		PY-S p0!n0m				pegnem	pegnem	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \
pegte-	gs[ns-	release		pegtuq \'91it got free, came loose\'92; pegtaa \'91he released it, let it go, set it free\'92 / tapghaq pegtigu! \'91let go of the rope!\'92; angyat pegtut sikumeng \'91the boat came free of the ice\'92; pegtaa uyughani mekelghiighhaq tasluqsaqenni \'91he let go his little brother's hand which he'd been holding\'92; nuliini pegtaa ima siivanlleghet akuziteghngaatni \'91he divorced his wife despite the elders advising against it\'92	let go	divorce								set free			to release; to let go; to divorce; to set free		PY p0!t0-				pegte-	pegte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pegtirake-	gs[nbhfrs-	not take care of or look after		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  pegte-	neglect												to not take care of; to not look after; to neglect	yt pf,jnbncz					pegtirake-	pegtirake-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
pegtunaq	gs[neyf2	much		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E); particle													
\f0\i0 much	vyjuj			CK V & E 130; Rub 434		pegtunaq	pegtunaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
pegya-	gsumz-	forget		mekelghiighhaam ayapghaatagni pegyamakek \'91the little boy carelessly left his mittens behind and forgot where they were\'92; pegyaa an'giitkani \'91she wandered off from the child about the one (the child) she had taken outside\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  puygu-	leave behind accidentally	lose								leave unattended			to leave unattended; to forget; to leave behind accidentally; to lose		< pegte-?-;				pegya-	pegya-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 -\
pegyeghqe-	gsuqs52s-	expose to public view		puughtimallgha sukalluku pegyeghqumakangat \'91the fact that he cheated was quickly revealed\'92; tafsini sayugluku sayugaatagneng esqamna imma sayugaatam pegyeghqeghllagumakanga \'91when he pulled his belt out of his drawer he threw everything inside the drawer into disarray\'92	bring into the open	throw into disarray								reveal			to expose to public view; to bring into the open; to reveal; to throw into disarray		< pegte-?-				pegyeghqe-	pegyeghqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1253 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
pekagh-	gsrf4-	pant		aqfaatepagluni pekaghtuq elngaatall \'91he ran so hard that he is really panting\'92; agepsum pekaghlluku tuqusimakanga \'91he died by being suffocated by smoke\'92	gasp	suffocate								drown			to pant; to gasp; to suffocate; to be out of breath; to down						pekagh-	pekagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pekaghyug-	gsrf4m/u-	trouble breathing (have ~)															to have trouble breathing		< pekagh-yug-				pekaghyug-	pekaghyug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
peke-	gsrs-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > pekeqe-, pekete-, pekfig-, pekighqu-, peksag-, peksigaghte-, pekuutaq															PE p0k0- (?)				peke-	peke-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 -\
pekeqaaq	gsrs262	root (sweet-tasting ~ type)		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; cf.
\f0\i0  qakeqaaq													type of sweet-tasting root		< pekeqe-?-aq				pekeqaq	pekeqxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \u257 \u1179 \
pekeqe-	gsrs2s-	dig carelessly		pekeqaa \'91he dug it (ground or object) up\'92 / pekeqiiq \'91he dug around\'92; nutagham igleghusim pekeqellgha nunameng tumemeng siivanlleghet qivghukepigtaat \'91the elders are upset over the pathways which have become all dug up by modern vehicles\'92; peghukaq pekeqaa taakwna egtelleq \'91he dug up the trash that was burried\'92; pekeqaat aksaqegkaaq tamaana ima sukalluku \'91they are quickly uncovering the secret\'92	mess up the ground	unearth (literally or figuratively)											to carelessly dig; to mess up the ground; to unearth (literally or figuratively)		< peke-?-				pekeqe-	pekeqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
pekete-	gsrsns-	shovel		peketuq \'91he shoveled something\'92; peketaa \'91he shoveled it\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he fired her\'92 /	fire from work												to shovel; to fire from work		PE p0k0t- (under PE p0k0-); < peke-?-				pekete-	pekete-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pekfig-	gsrabu-	ransack		pekfigtuq \'91he dug around\'92; pekfigaa \'91he is dug around in it, ransacking it\'92 / teglengalghiit pekfiglagluku mangteghaa aghnalqwaaghem unisimakangat unuk \'91thieves ransacked the old woman's house last night and left it a mess\'92; = pukfig-	dig around in												to ransack; to dig around in		< peke-?-				pekfig-	pekfig-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1075 -\
pekighqu-	gsrb52e-	dig around in things			yank												to dig around in things; to yank		< peke-?-				pekighqu-	pekighqu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 -\
pekneq	gsry]s2	tuber, sweet-tasting, of tall cottongrass plant, taken from mouse (vole) caches		pekneghniighyaatet aga tutmaghwaaghaqeftut \'91the people who went gathering sweet tubers are searching for mouse caches by feeling with their feet (to locate hollow places under the ground)\'92	
\f2\i Eriophorum angustifolium 
\f0\i0 (tuber, taken from mouse (vole) caches)	cottongrass, tall, tuber, taken from mouse (vole) caches											sweet-tasting tuber of tall cottongrass plant 
\f2\i (Eriophorum angustifolium). 
\f0\i0 taken from mouse (vole) caches		PE p0kn03; < pekete-neq\super 2				\nosupersub pekneq	pekneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
peksag-	gsrczu-	scatter things		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  peksagtuq \'91he scattered things \'91/ 													to scatter things		< peke-?-				peksag-	peksag-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 -\
peksigaghte-	gsrcbuf5ns-	rip apart; to pull apart; to pry apart; to break up snow or ground		Tuunyatni ugatanganun aglaghluni mingla siklaghyaqenni allaghhiinaq tangiqaq 
\f2\i peksigaghsimakanga
\f0\i0 . \'91When she had distributed  them, she went toward the exit, dug into the wall with the pick, and 
\f2\i pried out
\f0\i0  all sorts of edible greens.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 152)	pull apart	pry apart								break up snow or ground			to rip apart; to pull apart; to pry apart; to break up snow or ground		< peke-?-		Akiingqwaghneghet 116		peksigaghte-	peksigaghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b pekug-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gsreu-\'a1	disperse quickly		
\f2\i questioned													
\f0\i0 to disperse quickly		< peke-?-				pekug-1	pekug-1	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1091 \u1075 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub pekug-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gsreu-\'99	awake (become fully ~)		pekugtuq \'91he became fully awake\'92 / pekugtaa \'91he woke her up fully\'92; qavaghninguyalghiinga ima pekugtunga jet-et naghughsinkut \'91I was sleepy but I became fully awake when the jet plane passed over us\'92	alert (become ~ from a groggy state)												to become fully awake; to become alert from a groggy state		PE pekku(!)-				pekug-2	pekug-2	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1091 \u1075 -\super 2\
\nosupersub pekuutaghraak	gsr8nf5h6r	northern shoveler duck		ray, skate 
\f2\i meaning questioned	Anas clypeata	
\f0\i0 ray (fish)								skate (fish)			northern shoveler duck (Anas clypeata); ray; skate		< pekuutaq-raak				pekutaghrak	pekxtaghrxk	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
pekuutaq	gsr8nf2	shovel			halibut	turbot											shovel; halibut; turbot		PY-S p0kutaq; < peke-?-(u)taq				pekutaq	pekxtaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
pelaataq	gsk6nf2	blotting paper		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 blotting paper	ghjvjrfntkmyfz ,evfuf	from English \'91blotter\'92	Chuk.	CK Rub 420		pelataq	pelxtaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
pelaaya-, pelaaye-	gsk9z-. gsk9qs-	play card		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 cards (play ~)												to play cards		from English \'91play\'92	SLI Chuk.			pelaya-, pelaye-	pelxya-, pelxye-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1103 -, \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1253 \u1099 -\
pelaayae	gsk9zs	playing card		pelaayet \'91cards, a deck of cards\'92	card, playing												playing card		from English \'91play\'92	SLI			pelayae	pelxyae	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1103 \u1099 \
pelataqute-	gskznf2ens-	scatter		taghnughhaat aghnam ughnegi pelataqusimiit \'91the children scattered the woman\'92s sewing all around\'92; naghaaghutet qaga pelataqumaat entaqun \'91the toys are probably scattered all around outside\'92													to scatter				CK A & W 72		pelataqute-	pelataqute-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
peleghqe-	gsks52s-	injured seriously (get ~)		peleghqumaaq ifkaghluni ukigaaghluni pennani \'91he got seriously injured when he fell while climbing the cliff\'92; qimugsiqaq yuuk aviisan ivaghilghiit naalkesaqmegteggu taawa peleghqumalghii kanaghluni kagimleghmi sikumi \'91when the man who had gone hunting by dog team did not return, the others went out to look for him and found him dead, apparently because he had been unable to get back on solid ice when he fell into the slush ice area\'92	die due to accident												to get seriously injured; to die due to accident						peleghqe-	peleghqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
peleghqii-	gsks527-	death in the family (have a ~)															to have a death in the family		< peleghqe-?-				peleghqi-	peleghqx-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1251 -\
peleqeyengiigh-	gsks2sqs374	improperly finish a task		peleqeyengiighmeng ulimaaghet piyukniilnguut \'91the carvings don\'92t look as good, because they were improperly finished\'92; qamislikagni peleqeyengiighlaataghaak \'91he did a careless job on the sled he made\'92	finish improperly	careless (do a ~ job)											to improperly finish a task; to do a careless job				CK A & W 72		peleqeyengigh-	peleqeyengxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1251 \u1271 \
pelghute-	gsk4ens-	agree on		angyaghhaat nutaanllu pelghutii \'91finally it (the weather) is suitable for the boats (to go out)\'92	favorable (be ~ for)												to agree on; to be favorable for; to be suitable				CK A & W 72		pelghute-	pelghute-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pelime-	gskbvs-	shatter		pelimuq \'91it shattered\'92 / qergesek kavleguuteghllagyan pelimuk \'91when there was a loud boom the window shattered\'92; qikut sangllaqat gaapagumangilnguut pelimyugumaaqut \'91things made of clay fall apart easily if they are not properly fired\'92	crumble	fall apart								break into many pieces			to shatter; to crumble; to fall apart; to break into many pieces						pelime-	pelime-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1099 -\
pelimte-	gskbvns-	break into pieces		pelimtaa \'91he broke it into pieces\'92 / sugenreghem siku pelimtekanga esghapagaa \'91he watched the ice as the swells broke it up\'92													to break into pieces		< pelime-te\super 1\nosupersub -				pelimte-	pelimte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pelkwaagh-	gsk]2164-	unaware (become ~ of one\'92s surrounding)		unugmi igleghtaq alingyugem pelkwaaghnanightuq \'91because of being scared the one traveling at night ceased being unaware of his surroundings (that is, began to pay close attention to them)\'92; igleghaneghpesini aatak pelkwaaghpenasi \'91while you\sub pl\nosupersub  are traveling, don\'92t let yourself become distracted from your surroundings\'92	distracted (be ~ from one\'92s surroundings)	wander around								attention (not pay ~)			to become unaware of one\'92s surrounding; to be distracted from one\'92s surroundings; to not pay attention; to wander around		cf. PE 0pla-		CK A & W 72		pelkwagh-	pelkwxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
pellagh-	gsk]z4-	lonely		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  pellaghyugtuq \'91he is lonely or bored\'92; pellaghnaghtuq \'91it makes one lonely or bored\'92; pellaqetaq \'91one who gets lonely or bored easily\'92; esla seghleq taakluni navek piniinneq pellaghnaghtuq \'91it gets boring when bad weather lasts for a long time\'92; pellaqetaatmineng ighnemta tagiyaghaghtestiinkut wiin tagannaqeghngaamta \'91because he gets lonely so easily our son made us come back though we had intended to stay away longer\'92	bored												lonely; bored		cf. PE 0pla-				pellagh-	pellagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
pellaghiitaq	gsk]z47nf2	amusement		atuq pellaghiitaaguq \'91Eskimo singing is good entertainment\'92; pellaghiitaqaqa eltughaqa \'91I have my grandchild for company\'92 	entertainment	company (companionship)											amusement; entertainment; 		< pellagh-(ng)iitaq				pellaghitaq	pellaghxtaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
pellallaagh-	gsk]fk[64-	blow out air with the lips closed together (as babies and small children do)		ayumiq taghnughhaat pellallaanghata esla naafnaqniiqegkangat \'91long ago, when children make their blowing noise, they say the weather was going to go bad\'92; enkaam pellallaaghtesnaanighaqegkangit \'91so they don\'92t let them make that blowing noise noise\'92													to blow out air with the lips closed together making a noise (as babies and small children do)				CK A & W 72 CK		pellallagh-	pellallxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1083 \u1093 \u257 \u1271 -\
pellangghite-	gsk]f34bns-	disperse		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to disperse				CK Rub 431		pellangghite-	pellangghite-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1187 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pellegh-	gsk]s4-	come apart (especially along a line of some sort through the middle)		pelleghtuq \'91it came  apart\'92 / pelleghtaa \'91he divided it\'92; 
\f2\i plate
\f0\i0 -a pelleghtuq qusighqelleghmikun \'91the plate came apart along its crack\'92; mani pelleghtaak qukaakun \'91they\sub 2 \nosupersub divided the money\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 pilleghqute-	fall apart	separate								divide			to come apart (especially along a line of some sort through the middle); to fall apart; to separate; to divide; to go in separate ways						pellegh-	pellegh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 -\
pelleghmun	gsk]s4vey	different (in ~ directions)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  pelleghmun qimaguutut \'91they fled in different directions\'92													in different directions		< pellegh-
\f2\i terminalis				
\f0\i0 pelleghmun	pelleghmun	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
pellghute-	gsk]5ens-	part from each other		pellghutut \'91they parted from each other\'92; pellghutaa \'91he put some aside for her\'92 / ima pellghututuk nek taakuk \'91too bad that that couple got a divorce\'92; pellghutaanga suqameng \'91he put aside some baleen for me\'92	divorce	put aside for											to part from each other; to divorce; to put aside for		< pellegh-(u)te-				pellghute-	pellghute-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pelliilgutaq	gsk]7kuenf2	pastime		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  pelliili-													pastime		< pellagh-(ng)igh-lgu-(u)taq		from Jr. Dict. pg. 37		pellilgutaq	pellxlgutaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
pelliili-	gsk]7kb-	support (give moral ~)		pelliilii elngaatall taam yugem nenglaghnalghiim tukuni \'91that amusing man is entertaining his hosts\'92	entertain	give moral support											to entertain; to give moral support; to keep (one) from being lonely		< pelliite-?-				pellili-	pellxli-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1083 \u1080 -\
pelliite-	gsk]7ns-	company (be good ~)		upenghami pelliitaquq payangisaghtunghani qavngarugllak salin payangitkayuguluku \'91many years ago just anticipating and awaiting the arrival of people from the other side (Chukotka) kept one from getting lonely\'92; pelliilnguq \'91entertaining person or place\'92	interesting	cheerful (cause one to be ~)											to be good company; to be interesting; to cause one to be cheerful		< pellagh-(ng)ite-		CK V & E 152  (3 and 4 gloss)		pellite-	pellxte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pellug-	gsk]/u-	scrape dried fat off a skin of a small animal after the skin has been dried and in so doing to stretch and soften the skin			process frozen greens by a scraping action												to scrape dried fat off a skin of a small animal after the skin has been dried and in so doing to stretch and soften the skin; to process frozen greens by a scraping action		PY-S p0@u!-				pellug-	pellug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
pellugusiq	gsk]/uecb2	board or other hard surface used under a skin being scraped with a skin scraper															board or other hard surface used under a skin being scraped with a skin scraper		< pellug-(u)siq				pellugusiq	pellugusiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \

\f1\b pelluk\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gsk]/r\super \'a1	\nosupersub skin-scraping tool worked with both hands and resembling a spokeshave		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  pellugek,
\f2\i  for one such tool													
\f0\i0 skin-scraping tool worked with both hands and resembling a spokeshave						pelluk1	pelluk1	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 1\

\f1\b pelluk\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gsk]/r\super \'99	\nosupersub summer tent with flat sloped roof		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)													
\f0\i0 summer tent with flat sloped roof	ktnyzz zhfyuf c gkjcrjq gjrfnjq rhsitq			CK V & E 82; Rub 430		pelluk2	pelluk2	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 2\
pellumeghtaq	gsk]/vs5nf2	dish of frozen greens shredded finely by a scraping process, mixed with reindeer fat and chilled															dish of frozen greens shredded finely by a scraping process, mixed with reindeer fat and chilled		< pellumeq-te\super 1\nosupersub -aq				pellumeghtaq	pellumeghtaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
pellumeq, pellughrak	gsk]/vs2. gsk]/4hfr	soft surface of dirt snow or sand															soft surface of dirt snow or sand		< pellug-? (?)				pellumeq, pellughrak	pellumeq, pellughrak	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1179 , \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
pellumghute-	gsk]/v4ens-	fall into soft surface as of snow															to fall into soft surface as of snow		< pellug-(u)te-				pellumghute-	pellumghute-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pelu-	gsk/-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > pelungi, pelungigh-, pelungite-															PE p0lu(3)				pelu-	pelu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 -\
pelungi	gsk/3b	cleanliness															cleanliness		< pelu-?-				pelungi	pelungi	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \
pelungigh-	gsk/3b4-	clean up		pelungighaa \'91he cleaned it up\'92													to clean up		< pelu-(ng)igh-				pelungigh-	pelungigh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
pelungite-	gsk/3bns-	clean (be ~)		pelunginneq \'91very tidy neat thing or person\'92	tidy (be ~)												to be clean; to be tidy		< pelu-(ng)ite-				pelungite-	pelungite-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b peluusa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gsk0cz\super s	\nosupersub saucer															saucer		from Russian ,k/lwt (blyudtse) \'91saucer\'92				pelusae	pelxsae	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1089 \u1103 \u1099 \
pelwetemnakun	gsk1snsvyfrey	file (hand tool)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 rasp												file (hand tool); rasp		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 429		pelwetemnakun	pelwetemnakun	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1265 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
peng'gu-	gs3ue-	worry about		peng'waa \'91he is worried about him\'92 / peng'waa elngaatall taawa yugem panini ima tanqimi sivulighmi agani Sivungaghtekaq \'91he is very worried about his daughter who went to Savoonga last month\'92	concerned (be ~ about)												to worry about; to be concerned about		PE p0&0!-				peng'gu-	peng'gu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1075 \u1091 -\
pengeg-	gs3su-	worry about someone who hasn't returned as expected or who is far away		pengegtuq \'91he is worried\'92 / pengegtuq panigmineng kaasigalngughmeng inghuyaneng \'91he is worried about his daughter who hasn't come back from picking berries\'92													to worry about someone who hasn't returned as expected or who is far away		PE p0&0!-				pengeg-	pengeg-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1075 -\
pengekragti-	gs3srif[nb-	watch out for (because of worry)		angyaneng aviilngughneng yuget esnami pengekragtitaqut \'91the men are keeping an eye out for the boats that are gone because they are worried about them\'92													to watch out for (because of worry)		< pengeg-?-		CK A & W 73 CK 		pengekragti-	pengekragti-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 -\
Pengetaaghhaq	Gs3sn65f2	Myghapowit Mt. (small hill just north of ~ with VABM \'93Black\'94)		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 small hill just north of Myghapowit Mt. with VABM \'93Black\'94				CK		Pengetaghhaq	Pengetxghhaq	\uc0\u1055 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
pengetaagte-	gs3sn6[ns-	bumpy (surface or ice or ground is ~)		Sigugneghem qaaynga taklaghruketun kumlalluni qagingughlluni sikumeng qaakfikughyaqminigu 
\f2\i pengetaagteghllagaa
\f0\i0 . \'91The ice above the beach line froze evenly flat, it became wavy and ice was brought on top of it making it 
\f2\i bumpy
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SULUWET 109)													for surface or ice or ground to be bumpy		< penguq-?-				pengetagte-	pengetxgte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1090 \u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pengiq	gs3b2	wood (not hardwood, but strong)		Taakepigtaqut 
\f2\i pengiiwaqutlu
\f0\i0  entaqun quukaqaput\'85 \'91The long ones were 
\f2\i fir
\f0\i0 , and we had them for firewood\'85\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)	pine wood	larch tree								fir wood			wood (not hardwood but strong); pine wood; larch tree; fir wood		PE pe&i3		gloss 3: CK Rub. 432		pengiq	pengiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
pengke-	gs3rs-	worry about		pengkaa \'91he is worried about him\'92 / pengkaa ighneni maligutesnegha taakutgun angyatgun \'91he is worried about his son who has gone with them in that boat\'92													to worry about		< pengeg-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				pengke-	pengke-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1082 \u1099 -\
pengugaghte-	gs3euf5ns-	bump forms from injury			small hill forms												for a bump to form from an injury; for a small hill to form	ibirf jn eib,f	< penguq-?		CK Rub 432 CK		pengugaghte-	pengugaghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pengugh-	gs3e4-	swell in a lump, bump or hump			rise in a lump, bump or hump												to swell or rise in a lump, bumpor hump		PE p0&u3				pengugh-	pengugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
Pengughqaq	gs3e52f2	Collier Camp (site with a sizable mound about a mile back from ~ (Kangii) on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i See Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 a site with a sizable mound about a mile back from Camp Collier (Kangii) on St. Lawrence Is.		< penguq-kaq				Pengughqaq	Pengughqaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
pengughqaq	gs3e52f2	rising lump			hillock												rising lump; hillock	,eujh. djpdsitybt\\ dfk	< penguq-kaq		CK V & E 43		pengughqaq	pengughqaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
pengugneq	gs3euys2	protrusion caused by something pushing from behind											should this be pengughneq instead?				protrusion caused by something pushing from behind		< pengugh-neq\super 2				\nosupersub pengugneq	pengugneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
pengugpagngalghii	gs3e[gfu3fk47	wavy surface															a wavy surface	djkybcnsq	< penguq-?-lghii		CK Rub 432		pengugpagngalghi	pengugpagngalghx	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
pengukrak	gs3erifr	mound		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 hill, small												mound; small hill	,eujhjr\\ [jkvbr	< penguq-krak		CK Rub. 431		pengukrak	pengukrak	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
penguq	gs3e2	hill, rounded															rounded hill		PE p0&u3				penguq	penguq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
Pengutekuk	Gs3ensrer	Pingootikook Bay on St. Lawrence Is.															Pingootikook Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		< penguq-?				Pengutekuk	Pengutekuk	\uc0\u1055 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \
pengwaaq	gs3162	mound		
\f2\i there are two mounds, one at Taphok (
\f0\i0 Tapghuq
\f2\i ) and the other at Camp Collier (
\f0\i0 Kangii
\f2\i ) that are called specifically
\f0\i0  Pengwaaq	hill, small												mound; small hill		< penguq-?-				pengwaq	pengwxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
Peniilek	Gsb7ksr	Punelok Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Punelok Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		< peniiq-lek				Penilek	Penxlek	\uc0\u1055 \u1099 \u1080 \u1251 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
penitet	gsybnsn	leaf tobacco bunch		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); this is a plural													
\f0\i0 leaf tobacco bunch				CK Rub. 431		penitet	penitet	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \
pennaghniigh-	gsy]f4y74-	gather eggs from a cliff or engage in other cliffside activities		pennaghniightuq \'91he is gathering eggs (or doing another cliffside activity)\'92 /													to gather eggs from a cliff or engage in other cliffside activities		< pennaq-niigh-				pennaghnigh-	pennaghnxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
pennaghqute-	gsy]f52ens-	fall down from a cliff		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)													
\f0\i0 to fall down from a cliff	dfkbncz dybp	< pennaq-?-		CK V & E 166 CK; Rub 431		pennaghqute-	pennaghqute-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pennaq	gsy]f2	cliff															cliff		PE 0pna3				pennaq	pennaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \

\fs20 Penniighem Qalghighviga	Gsy]74sv @fk4b4dbuf	
\fs24 September		
\f2\i Chukotkan; literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time when the mountain sheep issues its cry\'92; 
\f2\i  listed in two sources giving these two quite separate months	
\f0\i0 December												September; December		< penniiq-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + qalqghigh-vik-
\f2\i possessed		
\f0\i0 see Krauss\'92s list	xxxq	Pennighem Qalghighviga	Pennxghem Qalghighviga	\uc0\u1055 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 \u1099 \u1084  \u1178 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \
penniighniighta	gsy]7y75nf	shepherd		
\f2\i used in Bible translation													
\f0\i0 shepherd		< penniiq-niigh-(s)ta				pennighnighta	pennxghnxghta	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
penniiq	gsy]72	sheep, domestic or wild		
\f2\i the wild sheep is found in Chukotka, but not on St. Lawrence Is.; domestic sheep are known through the Bible and other outside contacts; 
\f0\i0 \'85 kayutngunateng; 
\f2\i penniighestun
\f0\i0  
\f2\i penniighnightengilngughestun
\f0\i0 . \'91\'85 they were helpless; like 
\f2\i sheep
\f0\i0  without a 
\f2\i shepherd
\f0\i0 .\'92 (Matthew 10.36)	sheepskin	Dall sheep								
\f2\i Ovis dalli			
\f0\i0 Dall sheep 
\f2\i (Ovis dalli); 
\f0\i0 domestic sheep; sheepskin		PE 0pna3i3 (under PE 0pna3); < pennaq-PE (C)i3				penniq	pennxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1179 \
peqaq	gs2f2	wick (fine tundra moss used for ~ in seal-oil lamp)			lamp wick (fine tundra moss used for ~ in seal-oil lamp)												fine tundra moss used for wick in seal-oil lamp; lamp wick moss		PE 0p0qa3				peqaq	peqaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
peqigte-	gs2b[ns-	figure out		agghilghiit upenghaqun mangteghat nekefsaghqaaluku peqigtaat \'91they figured out how to place the house they will build the next spring\'92; llivelghangllaqagni pegnem peqighquumakek \'91he finally figured out how he is going to make his shelf\'92													to figure out				CK A & W 73		peqigte-	peqigte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b peqligh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gs2k]b4-\super \'a1	\nosupersub harden with age (especially of skins)		= peqlighte-													to harden with age (especially of skins)		PY p0qli3-				peqligh-1	peqligh-1	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub peqligh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gs2k]b4-\super \'99	\nosupersub deny having something (which one may or may not have)		peqlightuq \'91he denied having something\'92 / peqliitaa  \'91he denied to her that he has something\'92; peqliitkaa \'91he denied that he has it\'92; = peliqe-													to deny having something (which one may or may not have)						peqligh-2	peqligh-2	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub peqlighte-	gs2k]b5ns-	harden with age (especially of skins)		= peqligh-\super 1													\nosupersub to harden with age (especially of skins)		PY p0qli3-				peqlighte-	peqlighte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
peqliqe-	gs2k]b2s-	deny having something (which one may or may not have)		peqliquq \'91he denied having something\'92 / peqliqutaa \'91he denied to her that he has something\'92; peqliqutkaa \'91he denied that he has it\'92; = peqligh-\super 2													\nosupersub to deny having something (which one may or may not have)						peqliqe-	peqliqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
pequ	gs2e	unstable area in ice field where current causes ice to heave or break up leaving dangerous open water covered by thin ice or snow		
\f2\i see item 45 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	ice field (unstable area in ~ where current causes ice to heave up and/or break up leaving dangerous open water which is covered by thin ice or snow)	sea ice type											unstable area in ice field where current causes ice to heave or break up leaving dangerous open water covered by thin ice or snow						pequ	pequ	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \
peraagha-	gsh64f-	weather is suitable for hunting		pakfallameng anuqa ayuqenghani peraaghaneng lliighniiqaat uughqanun tevraq \'91they say that west wind makes it most suitable for hunting seals on the west coast\'92													for weather to be suitable for hunting			14	CK A & W 73		peragha-	perxgha-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 -\
perara	gshfhf	dish of finely minced meat cooked in meat broth and then jelled before eating															dish of finely minced meat cooked in meat broth and then jelled before eating		from Chukchi prerem, pl. prerem0t \'91meat pudding\'92	14			perara	perara	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \
periiwell	gh71sk]	let		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  periiwell whangkunnun malighulli ellngan qinuyuggnanghitiinkut \'91let him follow to our place, he won\'92t bother us\'92													let	gecnm	from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 421		periwell	perxwell	\uc0\u1087 \u1088 \u1251 \u1265 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \

\f1\b perqi-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gsi2b-\'a1	not want to do anything because of the cold		aatkapagilnguut maqalghiimeng uksumi perqiniiqiit \'91they say that people who don\'92t dress as warm as they should in winter do not want to do anything (outdoors)\'92; iqaniighyaq perqiyami tagimalghii \'91when the crabber got cold, and didn\'92t want to do anything, he went home\'92	cold (not want to do anything because of the ~)												to not want to do anything because of the cold				CK A & W 73		perqi-1	perqi-1	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1096 \u1179 \u1080 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub perqi-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gsi2b-\'99	twisted or bent (become ~ probably from arthritis (of dog\'92s leg(s))		qikmighpt perqingaaq \'91our dog has rheumatism\'92	rheumatic (be ~ (of dogs))	arthritic (be ~ (of dogs))											to become twisted or bent probably from arthritis (of dog\'92s leg(s)); to be rheumatic or arthritic (of dogs)				CK A & W 73		perqi-2	perqi-2	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1096 \u1179 \u1080 -\super 2\
\nosupersub perutku	gshenre	snuff box or other tobacco container		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  perutkuk,
\f2\i  for one tobacco container													
\f0\i0 snuff box or other tobacco container		from Russian ghjirf (proshka) \'91snuff\'92, probably via Chukchi protkooc!0n \'91snuff box\'92 	14, 15			perutku	perutku	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \
pesaaghnaq	gsc94yf2	calm		pesaaghnaaguq qaga \'91it is too calm and quiet out there\'92	quietness												calm; quietness				VK\'92s notes (not in Rub. or texts)		pesaghnaq	pesxghnaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
pesaaq	gsc92	whispering sound, quiet															quiet whispering sound				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 158		pesaq	pesxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
pesall	gsczk]			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > pesalli-, pesallngugh-																			pesall	pesall	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \
pesalli-	gscfk]b-	difficulty finding something (have a ~)		manini ifkaghluku pesallitkaqeftaa \'91he dropped his money and he was having a hard time finding it\'92													to have difficulty finding something		< pesall-?-		CK A & W 73		pesalli-	pesalli-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
pesallngugha-	gscfk]3]e4f-	difficulty breathing (in water as when overboard)		kiiwegni iquluni pesallngughamaluku maketqaghsimakanga \'91while he was having a hard time breathing when he fell in the river, she quickly let him stand up\'92; meq pesallngughanaghtuq pugimiigalngughni \'91the water  is the place where one has a hard time breathing for anyone who don\'92t know how to swim\'92													to have difficulty breathing (in water as when overboard)		< pesall-?-		CK A & W 73		pesallngugha-	pesallngugha-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 -\
pesiqagh-	gscb2f4-	eat walrus in frozen bite-size pieces		= pisiqagh-													to eat walrus in frozen bite-size pieces						pesiqagh-	pesiqagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pesiqaq	gscb2f2	walrus meat (frozen raw ~ eaten in bite-size pieces)		= pisiqaq													frozen raw walrus meat eaten in bite-size pieces						pesiqaq	pesiqaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
peskug-	gscreu-	slip off (as a rope off something to which it is fastened)		peskugtuq \'91it slipped off, it came to an end\'92 / peskugtaa \'91he slipped it off\'92; peskugtigu taana tapghaq agaqrameng taagken wall-melngughmeng \'91slip that rope off the hook on the wall\'92; sakraa pegnem taaga peskugtestaqa ugumiyugtenga atamta esghaghluku tawavestaghhaq \'91I had a hard time getting over my anger when I ran into the person who gave our father so much trouble\'92	come to an end (anger, sadness, etc.)												to slip off (as a rope off something to which it is fastened); to come to an end (anger, sadness, etc.)						peskug-	peskug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1082 \u1091 \u1075 -\
peskuq	gscre2	width		
\f2\i questioned													
\f0\i0 width						peskuq	peskuq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \
pesugh-	gsc/4-	stuffy		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  pesughnaghtuq \'91it is stuffy, suffocating\'92; pesughyugtuq \'91he is having difficulty breathing due to the stuffiness, he is suffocating\'92; pesughyugemnguq yuuk itagniilliqestaqeftaa \'91as we've seen, breathing problems are making him miserable\'92	suffocating												stuffy; suffocating						pesugh-	pesugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\

\f1\b petangu, petanguq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gsnf3e-. gsnf3e2\super \'a1	\nosupersub bowl, wooden															wooden bowl						petanguq1	petanguq1	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 -, \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 1\

\f1\b petanguq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gsnf32e2\super \'99	\nosupersub flipper bone		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 ?				flipper bone				CK Rub 433		petanguq2	petanguq2	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 2\
petangwaaq	gsnf3162	bowl, smaller, or bowl-like thing															smaller bowl or bowl-like thing		< petangu-?-				petangwaq	petangwxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
petaq	gsnf2	measles			chicken pox	pox (chicken ~ or similar disease)											measles, chicken pox or similar disease						petaq	petaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
petekesengiigh-	gsnsrscs374-	tiptoe		petekesengiightuq \'91he is tiptoeing\'92 /													to tiptoe						petekesengigh-	petekesengxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1251 \u1271 -\
petg-	gsn[-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > petga-, petgegh-															PY-S p0t!03-				petg-	petg-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 -\
petga-, petgagh-	gsn[f-. gsn[f4-	bounce		petgaaq \'91it bounced\'92 / < petg-?-													to bounce						petga-, petgagh-	petga-, petgagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1072 -, \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1072 \u1271 -\
petgagha-	gsn[f4f-	bounce repeatedly															to bounce repeatedly		< petga-?-				petgagha-	petgagha-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 -\
petgayu-	gsn[f/-	bouncy (be ~)															to be bouncy		< petga-yu-				petgayu-	petgayu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1072 \u1102 -\
petgegh-	gsn[s4-	bounce off something		iiyngakun naangquvleghameng petgeghvikluku aqnighqwaagaa \'91it hurt him when the little scrap of ivory bounced off his eye\'92													to bounce off something		< petg-?-				petgegh-	petgegh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1099 \u1271 -\
petgeghinagh-	gsn[s4byf4-	difficulty getting something (have ~)		qamiskani nuughyan aaptaghtaquyaghluni petgeghinaghtuq \'91when he ran out of supplies for the sled he was making, he went out to ask for some, but he had a hard time finding any\'92													to have difficulty getting something				CK A & W 74		petgeghinagh-	petgeghinagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Petngeghyak	Gsn3]s4mzr	Maknek River (site near mouth of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site near mouth of Maknek River						Petngeghyak	Petngeghyak	\uc0\u1055 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
petqa	gsn2f	quite another one			different								check; note that this word is in NSY				quite another one; different		from Chukchi p0tq0k \'91repeat\'92		deR. 353		petqa	petqa	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1179 \u1072 \
petug-	gsneu-	tie so as to keep in place		petugaa \'91he tied it to something\'92 / petuggu qikmiq taaggun napaqakun \'91tie that dog to that stake\'92	tether	fasten											to tie so as to keep in place; to tether; to fasten		PE p0tu!-				petug-	petug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 -\
petugaq	gsneuf2	tethered animal			restricted person												a tethered animal; a restricted person		< petug-aq				petugaq	petugaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
petugutaq	gsneuenf2	tether			tie rope or chain	rope (tie ~)								chain (tie ~)			tether; tie rope or chain		< petug-(u)taq				petugutaq	petugutaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b pezighmete-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gspb4vsns-\super \'a1	\nosupersub thawed (be totally ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to be totally thawed						pezighmete-1	pezighmete-1	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub pezighmete-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gspb4vsns-\super \'a1	\nosupersub red (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  pezighmelnguut nuyat \'91light brown hairs\'92	light-brown (be ~ (of hair))												to be red; to be light-brown (of hair)				CK Rub 428		pezighmete-2	pezighmete-2	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\
\nosupersub pezighte-	gspb5ns-	heat kelp for eating		pezighsaghqameng elqwaaghemng saghnaanga \'91I picked some kelp to be heated up for eating\'92; pezightekameng ugkekun neqnighqusimaat \'91they enjoyed cooked kelp with meat\'92													to heat kelp for eating				CK A & W 74; Rub 428		pezighte-	pezighte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1079 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pi	gb	thing		
\f2\i meaning heavily dependent on context;
\f0\i0  kellaagem pinga naagu \'91where is that part of the clock?\'92; pin naagu? \'91where is your thing?\'92; pit esghaamakesqaqiit \'91they say to look after (one's own) people\'92													thing		PE pi-				pi	pi	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \
pi-	gb-	do		piiq \'91he did or said something\'92; pii \'91he acted on it or said something to him\'92 / 
\f2\i meaning heavily dependent on context;
\f0\i0  pimakanga \'91he said to her\'92; pigu taana \'91do it to that\'92; piiq tawaten \'91he said thus\'92; pi! \'91go!\'92; pii-i! \'91go!\'92 
\f2\i (emphatic)
\f0\i0 ; pikaaguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  piskaaguq \'91he has gone\'92; piyalghiimi \'91as he went on (with his activity)\'92	act	say								go			to do; to act; to say; to go						pi-	pi-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 -\
pightughpak	gb5ne5gfr	snow (heavy drifting ~)															heavy drifting snow		< pightuq-ghpak				pightughpak	pightughpak	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
pightughruk	gb5ne4her	snow (light drifting ~)															light drifting snow		< pightuq-ruk				pightughruk	pightughruk	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
pightughseghaq	gb5ne5cs4f2	otter (land or river ~)		
\f2\i questioned whether this is actually the otter, the fur seal, or both; neither are found on St. Lawrence Is.; 
\f0\i0 Uyughaghma 
\f2\i pightughseghaq 
\f0\i0 guusaghaa anagtaa. \'91My younger bother shot at a 
\f2\i fur seal 
\f0\i0 and missed it.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 130)	fur seal	
\f2\i Callorhinus urinus							
\f0\i0 Rubstova has it for otter, and Walunga in his Resource Manual has it for fur seal-CK	
\f2\i Lutra canadensis			
\f0\i0 land or river otter 
\f2\i (Lutra canadensis)
\f0\i0 ; fur seal
\f2\i  (Callorhinus urinus)		
\f0\i0 PE pi3tu3ci3a3		gloss 2 CK		pightughseghaq	pightughseghaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
pightuq	gb5ne2	snow, drifting or blowing		pightughllugmi qimugsineq aqlagha seghleghllaguuq \'91traveling by dog team in drifting snow is very cold\'92													drifting blowing snow		PE pi3tu3				pightuq	pightuq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \
pigineq	gbubys2	insole  traditionally made of dried grass		kaamgegni piginighak \'91he put insoles in his boots\'92													insole traditionally made of dried grass		PE pi!in03				pigineq	pigineq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
pigraghaasi-	gbuhf46cb-	act to benefit one\'92s belongings		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)									
\f0\i0 check definitions				to act to benefit someone\'92s belongings	gjkmpetncz xe;jq dtom/\\ bcgjkmpetn ct,t yf gjkmpe xnj-k xe;jt			CK V & E 138		pigraghasi-	pigraghxsi-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 -\
piifqe-	g7a2s-	get things ready as for a ceremony			ready (get things ~ as for a ceremony)												to get things ready as for a ceremony		< piiv-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				pifqe-	pxfqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1092 \u1179 \u1099 -\
piifte-	g7ans-	set out for use		piiftaa \'91he set it out\'92 / piiftiiq \'91he set out something\'92; piivikaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  piiftefikaa \'91he set something out for him\'92; piiftekaaguq \'91it has been set out\'92													to set out for use		< piiv-te\super 1\nosupersub -				pifte-	pxfte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
piig-	g7u-	tear (rip)		piigtuq \'91it tore\'92; piigaa \'91he tore it\'92 / piilleq amsighqaa \'91she mended the tear\'92													to tear						pig-	pxg-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1075 -\
piighaghte-	g74f5ns-	quickly (go, say or act ~)															to go, say, or act quickly		< pi-?-aghte-				pighaghte-	pxghaghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
piighataaghagh-	g74fn64f4-	better (get ~)		piighataaghaghtuq qinuyuk yuuk \'91the sick man is getting better\'92; meq unegna seghleghllaguyalghii piighataaghaqeghtuq \'91the ocean that has been so rough is finally showing some improvement\'92	improve	get better											to get better; to improve		< pi-?-				pighataghagh-	pxghatxghagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
piighhaq	g75f2	braided thing			whale sinew braided into heavy cord for sewing skin boat covers												braided thing; whale sinew braided into heavy cord for sewing skin boat covers		< piighhe-aq				pighhaq	pxghhaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
piighhe-	g75s-	braid		piighhuq (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  piighhiiq) \'91he  braided something\'92; piighhaa \'91he is braided it\'92 /													to braid		PE pi39a!-				pighhe-	pxghhe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1203 \u1099 -\
piighqutagh-	g752enf4-	slap the water with a piece of baleen to get walrus excited and come to the surface		piighqutaghluki suumenghat kaalluki naghulkiinaghaqluki \'91they would slap the water and they would come to the angry walrus and harpoon it\'92													to slap the water with a piece of baleen to get walrus excited and come to the surface				CK A & W 74 CK; Rub 418		pighqutagh-	pxghqutagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
piighqutaq	g752enf2	striker of baleen used to strike water to attract sea mammals															striker of baleen used to strike water to attract sea mammals				VK\'92s notes		pighqutaq	pxghqutaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
piighqwaghate-	gb521f4fns-	go to help a boat that has caught a whale		angyaq taan\'92ga piighqwaghatuq \'91the boats out there are all going to the one that caught a whale\'92													to go to help a boat that has caught a whale				CK A & W 74		pighqwaghate-	pxghqwaghate-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
piighru	g74he	sty in eye											piighruk in Rub 410 -- probably the dual				sty in eye						pighru	pxghru	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \
piighwagh-	g741f4-	chase game by boat		angyat malagmeng piighwaamaluki naghughsimakangit \'91it turned out that they passed by a boat which was chasing aa bearded seal\'92; yakuqeqaghlluta piighwaghtukut ayveghnun \'91we cautiously approached the walruses\'92	approach game on ice by boat												to chase game by boat; to approach game on ice by boat				gloss 1 CK A & W 74; 2 CK Rub 410		pighwagh-	pxghwagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
piighwneq	g741ys2	draft coming into warm house as a vapor from the outside cold when the door is opened in winter		uumgaqluku esgha piighwneq iitghaatalghii \'91keep that door close, the draft is getting in\'92													draft coming into warm house as a vapor from the outside cold when the door is opened in winter				CK A & W 74		pighwneq	pxghwneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
piigna	g7uyf	behind (not far ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan; base
\f0\i0  ping-; 
\f2\i restricted demonstrative pronoun; absolutive/relative plural
\f0\i0  piingkut \'91those not far behind\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb 
\f0\i0 pigani \'91not far behind\'92													that one not far behind				Men. 1962:260		pigna	pxnga	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
piignga-	g7u3f-	stick out		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  savik minglemeng piigngaaquq \'91the knike is sticking out of the wall\'92	protrude												to protrude; to stick out	njhxfnm			CK Rub. 409		pignga-	pxgnga-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1075 \u1187 \u1072 -\
piigugh-	g7ue4-	tear up															to tear up		< piig-ugh-				pigugh-	pxgugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
piikna	g7ry]f	up there above		
\f2\i base: 
\f0\i0 pik-; 
\f2\i restricted demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 pikum \'91(of) the one up there\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 pikegkut \'91those up there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative: 
\f0\i0 piiksuq \'91you, up there\'92, pikegkughsi \'91you\sub pl\nosupersub  up there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric absolutive pronoun:
\f0\i0  tespikna 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  espikna \'91that one up there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 pikani \'91up there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  pikavek to up there; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 pikagun \'91through up there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb:
\f0\i0  pikegken \'91from up there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional:
\f0\i0  pika \'91there (up there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb:
\f0\i0  tespikani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  espikani \'91there, up there\'92	up from the water	north (
\f2\i additional meaning in Chukotka
\f0\i0 )											that one up there above; that one up from the water; that one to the north (
\f2\i additional meaning in Chukotka
\f0\i0 )		PE dem. pik-				pikna	pxkna	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \
piimsug-	g7vc/u-	pick all the meat from a bone		qawaagem yaqghwi piimsugii \'91he picked the bird wing clean\'92	eat completely the last meat that is clinging to a bone	pick clean											to pick all the meat from a bone and eat it; to completely eat the last meat that is clinging to a bone; to pick clean		< piiste\super 1\nosupersub -msug-				pimsug-	pxmsug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
piina	g7yf	paint		= piineq; 
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 paint		from English \'91paint\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R415)		
\f0\i0 pina	pxna	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \
piineq	g7ys2	paint		Angyamta 
\f2\i piingha
\f0\i0  keligluku piineqaghput. \'91After we scraped off our boat\'92s 
\f2\i paint
\f0\i0  we painted it.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 76); = piina; 
\f2\i also in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 paint		from English \'91paint\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R415)		
\f0\i0 pineq	pxneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
piineqe-	g7ys2s-	paint		piineqaa \'91he painted it\'92 / piineqiiq \'91he painted something\'92; piineqista \'91house-painter\'92; Apeghiighyamigu 
\f2\i piineqneghmeng
\f0\i0 , meteghllugem pii teghla: \'93Esgha, enngaatall pinightuten, kinquvek anuqataghaghmi whanga 
\f2\i piineqnakevnga
\f0\i0 .\'94 \'91When he finished his 
\f2\i painting
\f0\i0  the raven said to the owl: \'93See, you look very fine; when you dry off in the breeze, you can 
\f2\i paint
\f0\i0  me.\'94\'92 (AANGHHAQ 27)													to paint		< piineq-ke-				pineqe-	pxneqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
piineqisiq	g7ys2bcb2	paintbrush		
\f2\i plural,
\f0\i0  piineqisit, 
\f2\i used for one brush; 
\f0\i0 = piinequsiq													paintbrush		piineqe-i\super 1\nosupersub -siq				pineqisiq	pxneqisiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
piinequsiq	g7ys2ecb2	paintbrush		
\f2\i plural,
\f0\i0  piinequsit, 
\f2\i used for one brush; 
\f0\i0 = piineqisiq													paintbrush		piineqe-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				pineqisiq	pxneqisiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
piinghaq	g7y4f2	newly grown plant life		kiyang piinghaaluku ququngaq saghnakayugaat \'91willow leaves are picked mostly when they are newly grown\'92	full moon (beginning of ~)	month								year			newly grown plant life; the beggining of full moon; month; year				CK A & W 74; Rub 413		pinghaq	pxnghaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
piinleq	g7yks2	beginning		ilagaatem piinlegha atughhu \'91sing the beginning of the song\'92	start	precedent								forerunner			beginning; start; precedent; forerunner		< pi-?				pinleq	pxnleq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
piinligh-	g7ykb4-	begin		piinlighaa ullghitakun igleghtelleq \'91he started the use of snow machines\'92	start												to begin; to start		< piinleq-ligh-				pinligh-	pxnligh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
piinliin	g7yk7y	onset		piinliitanga wetku movie-m atuumaan liigikaqa esghaqaqeftaqa \'91not until the first part of the movie had been shown did I realize that I'd already seen it\'92; aghvengyuggaaq piinliitkaa kalleghsaaghtem \'91catching the first whale of the season signals the start of ball-playing at the beach\'92	first thing	beginning								introduction (as to a book)			onset; first thing; beginning; introduction (as to a book)		< piinligh-(u)n				pinlin	pxnlxn	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1083 \u1251 \u1085 \
piinlilleq	g7ykbk]s2	introduction (as to a book)															introduction (as to a book)		< piinligh-lleq\super 1				\nosupersub pinlilleq	pxnlilleq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1083 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
piinneghsiighaghvik	g7y]s5c74f4dbr	garden			flower pot or vase												garden; flower pot or vase		< piite\super 2\nosupersub -?-vik		gloss 2 CK Rub 415		pinneghsighaghvik	pxnneghsxghaghvik	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
piinpaghqe-	g7ygf52s-	wound (get a large ~)		ayviiluni sagmikun piinpaghqumalghii \'91he got a big cut from his knife when he was butchering a walrus\'92; sangwaa alngunak singikestaq piinpaghqusiqaqegkangat naten pillgilliqneghmeggni \'91anything sharp can cause large wounds when used carelessly\'92	injury (get a serious ~)												to get a large wound or serious injury				CK A & W 74		pinpaghqe-	pxnpaghqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
piinsuuka	g7yc0rf	beans		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 peas												beans; peas		probably from English \'91beans\'92 or \'91bean(s) soak\'92	SLI Chuk.	also in Rub 415 CK; 
\f2\i (R415, V&E52)		
\f0\i0 pinsuka	pxnsxka	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1085 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1082 \u1072 \
piiq	g72	bail			handle, bail-type												bail; bail-type handle						piq	pxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1179 \

\f1\b piislaya\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gbck]z\super s	\nosupersub thin rope		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  ellngan tuyusaghqani qepaqii piislayemeng \'91she ties her packages with string\'92	string												thin rope; string	njyrfz dth\'91drf\\ igfufn\\ ,tx\'91drf	from English \'91piece (of) line\'92 (cf. tuwaaya \'91twine\'92 from English \'91twine\'92)	Chuk.	CK Rub 416		pislayae	pxslayae	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1099 \
piisqaghte-	g7c2f5ns-	jump out of the water															to jump out of the water	dscrjxbnm bp djls	< piiz-qaghte-		CK Rub 416		pisqaghte-	pxsqaghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
piiste-	g7cns-	project (stick out)		piistuq \'91it stuck out\'92 /	protrude	stick out											to project; to stick out		< piiz-te\super 2\nosupersub -				piste-	pxste-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
piitaq	g7nf2	bone with meat to be picked off and eaten		piitameng ugkekunga \'91I have bones with meat on them to pick off and eat as my meal\'92													bone with meat to be picked off and eaten		< piite-aq		CK A & W 74 CK 		pitaq	pxtaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b piite-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub g7ns-\'a1	pick the meat meat from a bone and eat it			eat the last meat that is clinging to a bone												to pick the meat meat from a bone and eat it; to eat the last meat that is clinging to a bone						pite-1	pxte-1	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub piite-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub g7ns-\'99	new moon (for there to be a ~) or for a month to start		kaamwaaq piituq \'91the crowsfoot (plant) is sprouting\'92; siqineq piituq \'91the sun is rising\'92; Kaneghyengesiq piitaa? \'91did December begin yet?\'92; Siqineq 
\f2\i piinneghani
\f0\i0  nanevgaat aanleghaataqut aghnalqwaaghet unegtaqut. \'91When the sun 
\f2\i rises
\f0\i0 , the old men go out and the old women stay behind.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 48)	come into existence	sprout								rise (of the sun)			to come into view or into existence; to sprout; to rise (of the sun); for there to be a noon moon or for the month to start						pite-2	pxte-2	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub piitesighagh-	g7nscb4f4-	plant (arrange for vegetation to grow)		
\f2\i Piitesighaghta
\f0\i0  piitesighaghvigminun aglaghluni, ifkaghquqaq piitutneng. \'91A 
\f2\i sower
\f0\i0  went out to his garden to sow seeds.\'92 (Matthew 13.3) 	sow												to plant; to sow						pitesighagh-	pxtesighagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
piitesighaghvik	g7nscb4f4dbr	garden			flower pot or vase												garden; flower pot or vase		< piitesighaq-vik		gloss 2 CK Rub 415		pitesighaghvik	pxtesighaghvik	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
piitesighaq	g7nscb4f2	plant that someone is growing		Aghknaghaghhaak 
\f2\i piitesighaghmeng
\f0\i0  saghnatuk naayvam esnenganeng. \'91Two little girls picked 
\f2\i flowers
\f0\i0  together by the lake\'92s shore.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT.)	flower												plant that someone is growing; flower		< piite\super 2\nosupersub -sigh-aq		gloss 3 CK Rub 417		pitesighaq	pxtesighaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
piitkayuk	g7nrf/r	vegetation															vegetation		< piite\super 2\nosupersub -kayuk				pitkayuk	pxtkayuk	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \
piitkegsi--	g7nrs[cb-	sucessful in hunting and trapping (be ~)		uksumi whani piitkegsiiq kaviighniilghii, sighlatkumakanga \'91this winter he suceeded in getting a lot of foxes\'92; piitkegsikuyeng upenghaqun aghvenglaataghllequt \'91if they are fortune next spring, they will get a whale once again\'92	fortunate in hunting and trapping (be ~)												to be sucessful or fortunate in hunting and trapping				CK A & W 75		pitkegsi--	pxtkegsi--	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 -\
piitqughvike-	g7n2e4dbds-	plants grow on road or trail		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 for plants to grow on road or trail				CK Rub 417		pitqughvike-	pxtqughvike-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 -\
piitun	g7ney	seed 		Alungutellghem asingani siklaamalghii. Siklaghluni 
\f2\i piitutmeng
\f0\i0  akuquusimalghii. \'91She dug with a pick underneath the snowdrift. When she\'92d dug with a pick she gathered 
\f2\i plants
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 20);	root of plant	plant											seed; root of plant; plant				gloss 3 CK Rub. 417		pitun	pxtun	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
piitutraq	g7nenif2	flower		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 flower	wdtnjr	< piitun-?		CK Rub 417		pitutraq	pxtutraq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1096 \u1072 \u1179 \
piiv-	g7d-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > piivnga-, piifte-															PE pa(C)0vt0-				piv-	pxv-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1074 -\
piivnga-	g7d3f-	set out for use (have been ~)		piivngaaq \'91it has been set out\'92; naangiitutmineng quningi piivngaaqut \'91ever since she lost her mother her tears have been ready to burst forth\'92	set (be all ~ to come forth												to have been set out for use; to be all set to come forth		< piiv-nga-				pivnga-	pxvnga-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1074 \u1187 \u1072 -\
piiwagh-	g71f4-	go west		piiwaghtuutut Sivunghaghtat \'91the visitors to Savoonga are heading back west (to Gambell)\'92	go home	west (go ~)								home (go ~)			to go west; to go home				gloss 2 CK Rub. 410		piwagh-	pxwagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
piiz-	g7p-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > piiste-, piisqaghte-, piiznga-																			piz-	pxz-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1079 -\
piizneq	g7pys2	projection		piiznegha napaghyam yeghrat awavantepigtuq \'91the part of the mast that sticks out sticks out too far\'92	sticking out (something ~)												projection; something sticking out		< piiz-neq\super 2				\nosupersub pizneq	pxzneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1079 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
piiznga-	g7p3f-	sticking out (be ~)		piizngaaq \'91it is sticking out\'92 /													to be sticking out		< piiz-nga-				piznga-	pxznga-	\uc0\u1087 \u1251 \u1079 \u1187 \u1072 -\
pikayuk	gbrf/r	powerful shaman		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 shaman, powerful												powerful shaman				CK Rub 410		pikayuk	pikayuk	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \
pike-	gbrs-	own		pikaa \'91he owns it, has her as his relative\'92 / pikaqa \'91it is mine\'92; pikaghput uyavanteghngaan \'91he is our relative though how distant\'92	related (be ~ to)												to own; to be related to		< pi-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				pike-	pike-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
pikemla	gbrsvkz	threshold of house		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 threshold of house		perhaps from Chukchi piqim0l,pl. piqim0lti \'91rapids of river, shoal\'92	14			pikemla	pikemla	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \
pikraghniite-	gbrif4y7ns-	not good (appear ~)		ulimayugaaqiinguq pikraghniilnguut, tagtalmi piniightekat \'91his first carvings didn\'92t look so good, then as he made more, they improved\'92; yugmeng pikraghniilngughmeng esghaasimanga \'91I saw a person who doen\'92t look good\'92	unappealing (be ~)	undesirable (be ~)											to be unappealing, undesirable, or appears not to be very good		< pi-?-qragh-niite-		CK A & W 75 CK 		pikraghnite-	pikraghnxte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pilaanqegsagh-	gbk9y2s[cz4-	ready (get or be ~)		kilgaaqusaghqat pilaanqegsaalluteng ayuqut \'91the runners are all ready\'92; aangqaghtet aatkateng aatqughluki pilaaqegsaatut \'91the ball players have their uniforms on and are ready to play\'92													to get or be ready		< pi-?-sagh		CK A & W 75		pilanqegsagh-	pilxnqegsagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
pilaataqu-	gbk6nf2e-	success (achieve ~); do something very well		Nangllegsiisiq uumun upenghaam neqniillgha 
\f2\i pilaataqusqelluku
\f0\i0 . \'91(It was) a supplication concerning the coming time that the spring hunt would 
\f2\i be a success
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:206)													to achieve success; to do something very well		< pi-laataqu		VK\'92s notes		pilataqu-	pilxtaqu	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
pilaayaghagh-	gbk6qf4f4-	teasingly say something and be taken literally		pilaayaghaghpenaan seghlequughyaghluku sugagsimakanga \'91he jokingly said not so nice things about her, and she was offended py it\'92													to teasingly say something and be taken literally				CK A & W 75		pilayaghagh-	pilxyaghagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u257 \u1253 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pilag-	gbkzu-	cut		pilagtuq \'91he butchered a whale\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he had surgery\'92; pilagaa \'91he cut it, butchered it, performed surgery on him or it\'92 / taaghtam pilagaa qinuyuk \'91the doctor performed surgery on the sick person\'92; pilagyaghtughtuq he went to have an operation\'92	slash	butcher whale								surgery (undergo or perform)			to cut; to slash; to butcher whale; to undergo or perform surgery		PE pila!-				pilag-	pilag-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 -\
pilagh-	gbkz4-	do many things		taakut aftakat iqalluget pilaghii enkaam whanga ilangi pilaghlleqanka \'91he got the salmon that are cut and I will get the others\'92; iqallugem naasqwi ellngan pilaghii \'91he took the salmon heads\'92	take many things												to do or take many things		< pil-?-		VK\'92s notes		pilagh-	pilagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 -\
pilagtugh-	gbkz[ne4-	cut repeatedly			saw (cut wood, ivory, metal, etc.)												to repeatedly cut; to saw		PE pila!tu3- (under PE pila!-)				pilagtugh-	pilagtugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
pilagtuusiq	gbkz[n8cb2	saw (cutting tool)															saw (cutting tool)		< pilagtugh-(u)siq				pilagtusiq	pilagtxsiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
piliigh-	gbk74-	eat by cutting off bits of meat eaten one at a time		piliightuq \'91he ate by cutting off bits of meat and eating them as he cut\'92; piliighaa \'91he cut chunks off of it and ate them\'92 /													to eat by cutting off bits of meat eaten one at a time		 < pilag-?-				piligh-	pilxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
pilleghqute-	gbk]s52ens-	disperse		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 pellegh-	leave in different directions												to disperse; to leave in different directions	hfc[jlbncz d hfpyst cnjhjys			CK Rub. 412		pilleghqute-	pilleghqute-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pillek	gbk]sr	proficient (one who is ~)		
\f2\i from the "empty base"
\f0\i0  pi- 
\f2\i which is "stress-repelling"  (see 
\f0\i0 Jacobson  1984b) 
\f2\i so that 
\f0\i0  i 
\f2\i does not lengthen during suffixation:
\f0\i0  pillguuq (
\f2\i rather than
\f0\i0  *piillguuq) \'91he is skillful\'92; pinighsaghimeng pillguuten \'91you are good at fixing things\'92	adept (one who is ~)	skillful person											one who is proficient; one who is adept; skillful person		< pi-llek				pillek	pillek	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \
pillgilliqe-	gbk][bk]b2s-	trouble (have ~ due to one\'92s ineptitude)		Nalugusimalghii tipelegneng eflugamun, 
\f2\i pillgilliqamikun
\f0\i0  Paapgallegaghhaq, aqnightelleghqagni suumqeghpenakek. \'91Poor little Paapgaq jumped from the table to the floor disregarding 
\f2\i any trouble he might have due to his ineptitude
\f0\i0  and not considering that he might get hurt.\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 7)													to have trouble due to one\'92s ineptitude		< pillgite-lliqe-		CK		pillgilliqe-	pillgilliqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
pillgite-	gbk][bns-	inept (be ~)		pillgituq \'91he is inept\'92 / pillgituq igaghyami \'91he is not good in school\'92; naangqumeng ulimameng pillgituq \'91he doesn't know how to carve ivory\'92; laluramketimeng pillgitunga \'91I'm not good at speaking English\'92	not be good in something												to be inept; to not be good in something		< pilleg-(ng)ite-				pillgite-	pillgite-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pillguyugte-	gbk][e/[ns-	put on airs		pillguyugtuq \'91he acts as if he can do things which he cannot\'92 / qinuyagulluku pillguyugsan yeghrat unitaat \'91when he became insufferable to them by putting on airs, they left him\'92	pretend to have abilities one does not have								Rub. 411 has pilguyugte-				to put on airs; to pretend to have abilities one does not have		< pillek-u-yug-?-				pillguyugte-	pillguyugte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1091 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pillugaasiq	gbk]/u6cb2	weapon for war															weapon for war	jhe;bt	< pillugagh-(u)siq		CK Rub. 412 CK		pillugasiq	pillugxsiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
pillugagh-	gbk]/uf4-	fight physically or fight in war															to fight physically; to fight in war		< pi-llug-?				pillugagh-	pillugagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pillugaghta	gbk]/uf4nf	warrior		
\f2\i Pillugaghtet
\f0\i0  wayaqegkiitneng Umiilgu qerngughtimalghii. \'91Umiilgu gathered up the 
\f2\i raiders\'92
\f0\i0  booty.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 46)	raider												warrior; raider		< pillugagh-(s)ta				pillugaghta	pillugaghta	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1090 \u1072 \
pillugaghyaghtuq	gbk]/uf4mz5ne2	warrior		Panameng tugulluni Umiilgum 
\f2\i pillugaghyaghtuq
\f0\i0  tuququumanga. Panaluku ama ughluveghmeng guulluku 
\f2\i pillugaghyaghtuq
\f0\i0  qamagsimakanga. \'91Taking a spear in hand Umiilgu killed every last 
\f2\i raider
\f0\i0 . Spearing them and shooting them with a bow he finished off the 
\f2\i raiders
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 46)	raider												warrior; raider		< pillug-agh-yagh-?				pillugaghyaghtuq	pillugaghyaghtuq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \
pillugute-	gbk]/uens-	fight physically or fight in war															to fight physically; to fight in war		< pi-llug-(u)te-				pillugute-	pillugute-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pilugug-	gbk/ueu-	put on one\'92s clothes		pilugugtuq \'91he put on his clothes\'92													to put on one\'92s clothes						pilugug-	pilugug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1075 -\
piluguk	gbk/uer	clothing		pilugugi qateperewaaghuut \'91his clothing is all white\'92													clothing	jlt;lf	PY pilu!(u!)				piluguk	piluguk	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1082 \
pinaaqa	gby62f	protective mark on clothes or protectively marked clothes			amulet	tassel											protective mark on clothes or protectively marked clothes; amulet; tassel		from Chukchi penaq0l!0n \'91tassel of dog hair worn on clothing by shaman\'92				pinaqa	pinxqa	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \u1072 \
pinagh-	gbyf4-	begin melt		
\f2\i said of lakes and rivers when the ice on them becomes unsafe for travel in the spring; 
\f0\i0 naayvaq pinaqan tagifqaavek wiin qimugsimeng \'91do not come, not even by dogteam when the lake starts to melt\'92	melt (begin to ~)	break up (start to ~ (of frozen lakes and rivers in spring)											to begin to melt; to start to break up (of frozen lakes and rivers in spring)		< pi-nagh-				pinagh-	pinagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Pinaghvik	Gbyf4dbr	June		
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , \'91time when melting of lakes begins\'92; 
\f2\i also given in various sources as
\f0\i0  April-May, May, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  June-July (
\f2\i and even as
\f0\i0  August!)													June		< pinagh-vik				Pinaghvik	Pinaghvik	\uc0\u1055 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
pinasaaq	gbyfcz2	bag (paper ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf. 
\f0\i0 pipasaak													paper bag	rek\'91r			CK Rub 413		pinasaq	pinasxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
pineghlliqe-	gbys4k]b2s-	obstinate (be ~)			stubborn (be ~)	heedless (be ~)											to be obstinate, stubborn or heedless		< pi-neq-lliqe-				pineghlliqe-	pineghlliqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
pineghllug-	gbys4k]/u-	obstinate (be ~)		pineghllugutmineng aqnighllaataghtuq as a result of his stubbornness he got badly hurt\'92	stubborn (be ~)	heedless (be ~)											to be obstinate, stubborn or heedless		< pi-neq-llug-				pineghllug-	pineghllug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
pineq	gbys2	case			opportunity	chance								incident			case; opportunity; chance; incident	ckexfq	< pi-neq\super ?		\nosupersub CK Rub 415		pineq	pineq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Pingayaa aghneq	Gb3f9 f4ys2	Tuesday		
\f2\i so called because Tuesday is the third day of the week													
\f0\i0 Tuesday		< pingayut + aghneq			xxxa	Pingaya aghneq	Pingayx aghneq	\uc0\u1055 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1103 \u772  \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
pingayuggaaghte-	gb3f/[65ns-	three (be only ~ left)		pingayuggaaghtut \'91there are only three of them left\'92													to be only three left		< pingayu(t)-ghhaq-ughte-				pingayuggaghte-	pingayuggxghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1102 \u1093 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pingayugneq	gb3f/uys2	three things or groups		
\f2\i used with a plural ending and therefore realized as 
\f0\i0 pingayugneghet, pingayugneghneng, 
\f2\i etc.; used to indicate three things, when the noun for that thing is used in  the plural or dual even for a single entitity,  or to indicate three groups (such as families), thus: Pingayugneghet
\f0\i0  angyat. \'91[There were] 
\f2\i three
\f0\i0  boats with crew.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:122; 
\f2\i note that plural, 
\f0\i0 angyat, 
\f2\i is used for one
\f0\i0  \'91boat with crew\'92); Naaka 
\f2\i pingayugneghneng
\f0\i0  qiipaghalek. \'91My mother had 
\f2\i three
\f0\i0  cloth cover parkas.\'92 (SULUWET 13; 
\f2\i note that dual, 
\f0\i0 qiipaghaak, 
\f2\i is used for one
\f0\i0  \'91cloth cover parka\'92); Taakut pughileghmelnguut Agaankutlu, Anagutaankutlu 
\f2\i malghugneghet
\f0\i0 . \'91Only 
\f2\i two
\f0\i0  families were staying permanently at Southwest Cape, Agaq and family, and  Anagutaq and family.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:162)													three things; three groups		< pingayu(t)-gneq				pingayugneq	pingayugneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
pingayuneng inglulek	
\fs20 gb3f/ys3 b3k/ksr	
\fs24 eight		
\f2\i Pingayuneng inglulguyalghiit 
\f0\i0 quyngighqwaaghet. Avegluteng pikaaftut. \'91There had been 
\f2\i eight
\f0\i0  reindeer herds. They split into two groups.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:58)													eight		< pingayut + inglu-lek			xxxi	pingayuneng inglulek	pingayuneng inglulek	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1102 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187  \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
pingayut	gb3f/n	three		Aasimakanga inglupigaq temkam ighunga inglunganun aasimakanga ilepghaaghem ighunga. Repall atanga aaghhweregaghmeng aanumalghii, llangaqa 
\f2\i pingayuneng
\f0\i0  ighukelghii. \'91However, he put on only one leg of the pants; on the other side he put on a long boot. The father went out crawling, looking like he had 
\f2\i three
\f0\i0  legs.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 72); 
\f2\i the word 
\f0\i0 pingayut 
\f2\i is
\f0\i0  plural, 
\f2\i but the singular 
\f0\i0  pingayu 
\f2\i can occur
\f0\i0  
\f2\i as in: 
\f0\i0 Kiyang 
\f2\i pingayu
\f0\i0  whanga qavaghlluki peghqightaataqaqanka, 
\f2\i pingayu
\f0\i0  
\f2\i qavaq
\f0\i0 . \'91It usually took me three days to break them in, 
\f2\i three
\f0\i0  days.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:90)													three		PE pi&ayut				pingayut	pingayut	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1102 \u1090 \
pingigigun	gb3bubuey	second spouse											after the death of the first, or polygamously				second spouse				VK\'92s notes		pingigigun	pingigigun	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
pingughte-	gb3e5ns-	become old enough to be a source help to parents or to take on a more adult role		pingughquutuq taghnughhaayalghii qavngaq \'91they all became helpers to their parents, at one time they were children\'92; pingughtaghaquvek sufluwangulleqamken \'91when you become more of a help to your parents, I will get you a gun\'92; taakut ighnelghutangit pingughquulluteng angyaaghtut \'91their many sons are all grown and are on the crew of the boat\'92	grow up (begin to ~)												to become old enough to be a source of help to parents or to take on a more adult role; to begin to grow up		< pi-(ng)ughte-		CK A & W 75		pingughte-	pingughte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pingwaaq	gb3162	important person		entaqun taana yuuk pingwaaghuuq esghaqun awen aaptaqaat wiin \'91I think that person is important because they usually ask him before doing anything\'92													important person		< pi-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub - (?)				pingwaq	pingwxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
pingwallaak	gb31fk]9r	oustanding one			distinguished one												oustanding one; distinguished one	pyfnysq			CK Rub. 416		pingwallak	pingwallxk	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
pinigh-	gbyb4-	good (be ~)		pinightuq \'91it is good\'92 / pinightunga \'91I\'92m fine\'92	satisfying (be ~)	fine (be ~)											to be good; to be satisfying; to be fine		< pi-neq-ligh-				pinigh-	pinigh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
pinighhalek	gbyb5fksr	good (how good!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle: 
\f0\i0 pinighhalek kiigmi uqfigmi \'91oh, how good (it is) in the summer in the trees\'92													how good!	rfr [jhjij			CK Rub 415 CK		pinighhalek	pinighhalek	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
pinighi-	gbyb4b-	better (get ~)		pinighiiq 'it improved, got better'	improve												to get better; to improve		< pinigh-(gh/l)i-				pinighi-	pinighi-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 -\
pinighnagh-	gbyb4yf4-	pleasing (be made ~)		mangteghaq piineqsalghiimi pinighaghtaa \'91now that the house has been painted it looks nice\'92													to be made pleasing		< pinigh-nagh-				pinighnagh-	pinighnagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pinighnaq	gbyb4yf2	nice thing or person, thing made nice			beautiful thing or person												something made nice; nice thing or person; beautiful thing or person		< pinigh-naq				pinighnaq	pinighnaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
pinighqaq	gbyb52f2	active person physically		pinighqaatmineng yuuk sigugneghem qaaynganun qetgeghtuq \'91since he is a fit man, he jumped on to the snow bank\'92	healthy person who takes care of himself by exercising												one who is physically very active; a very healthy person who takes care of himself by exercising				CK A & W 75; Rub 414		pinighqaq	pinighqaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
pinighqe-	gbyb52s-	enjoy life		pinighquq \'91he enjoyed life\'92	live well or contentedly	contentedly (live ~)											to enjoy life; to live well or contentedly		< pinigh-?-				pinighqe-	pinighqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
pinighqun	gbyb52ey	decoration		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E); 
\f0\i0 qikmit aywan yugitnun tagitiiqut aangelghimeng pinighqutmeng \'91the dogs give a great benefit to the northern peoples\'92	benefit												decoration; benefit	erhfitybz	< pinighqe-(u)n		CK V & E 92; Rub 414		pinighqun	pinighqun	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
pinighsagh-	gbyb5cf4-	fix			decorate 												to fix; decorate		< pinigh-sagh-		CK		pinighsagh-	pinighsagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pinightutala-	gbyb5nenfkz-	beauty			quality												beauty; quality	rhfcjnf\\ lj,hjnyjcnm	< pingh-tu-tala		CK Rub 415		pinightutala-	pinightutala-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 -\
pinighyug-	gbyb4m/u-	cheerful (be ~)															to be cheerful	hflencz	< pinigh-yug-		CK V & E 152 CK		pinighyug-	pinighyug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
piniighte-	gby75ns-	improve		tuquyuk piniighteghraagaa legan \'91the critically ill patient has certainly gotten better\'92; Esla 
\f2\i piniightekan
\f0\i0  igleghllequnga. \'91When the weather 
\f2\i improves
\f0\i0  I\'92ll travel.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 131)	better (get ~)	acceptable (become ~)								good (become ~)			to improve; to get better; to become good; to become acceptable		<pinigh-(ng)ughte-				pinighte-	pinxghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
piniiyugneq	gby7/uys2	hypocrite		
\f2\i used in Bible translation:
\f0\i0  Uyuq 
\f2\i piniiyugneq!
\f0\i0  Sivukluku unaghsighllak iyegpeneng nusugluku elngaatall whateghlluwaaq esghaghluku yulguten iisqughutngighnaken. \'91You 
\f2\i hypocrite!
\f0\i0  First take the log out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to take the speck out of your neighbor\'92s eye.\'92 (Matthew 7:5)													hypocrite		< pinigh-?-neq\super 2				\nosupersub piniyugneq	pinxyugneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1251 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Pinilghii Ungipaq	Gbybk47 E3bgf2	Gospel		Pinilghiit Ungipat \'91the Gospels\'92													Gospel		< pinigh-lghii + ungipaq			xxxu	Pinilghi Ungipaq	Pinilghx Ungipaq	\uc0\u1055 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251  \u1059 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \
piniqe-	gbyb2s-	like		piniqaa \'91he likes it\'92 /	love	approve											to like; to love; to approve		< pinigh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				piniqe-	piniqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
piniqumtaaq	gbyb2evn62	boyfriend			girlfriend												uuboyfriend; girlfriend		< pinigh-qumtaaq				piniqumtaq	piniqumtxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
piniraaghinaq*	gbybh64byf2	best thing		Nangzeghaat neqesghaaluteng 
\f2\i piniraaghinaat
\f0\i0 . \'91The hard seal blubber is 
\f2\i the best thing
\f0\i0  to use as bait.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 113); Mangteghaqsagutaput. Legan unaghsimeng tawaten ulimaluki, canvas-meng qantaghluki. Llaaghanwha legan azigutat 
\f2\i piniraaghinaat
\f0\i0 . \'91It became our house. Then we improved it with wood, and covered it with canvas. And so
\f2\i  it was the best possible
\f0\i0  shelter.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:70)													the best thing		< pinigh-raaghinaq				piniraghinaq*	pinirxghinaq*	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
pinitun	gbybney	good (in a ~ way)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  kiyaghtaquq pinitun \'91he lives well\'92; pinitun ayuquq \'91it is going good\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91it appears to be good\'92 (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , \'91it is like, good\'92)	well (in a good way)												in a good way; well		< pinigh-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 pinitun	pinitun	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
pinitungwaaq	gbybne3162	carefully		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 cleverly	beautifully								eloquently			carefully; cleverly; beautifully; eloquently; nicely; prudently		< pinitun-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-				pinitungwaq	pinitungwxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
piniyugte-	gbyb/[ns-	rejoice		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 good state of mind (be in a ~)												to rejoice; to be in a good state of mind		< pinigh-?		Rub.		piniyugte-	piniyugte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pinqusiq	gby2ecb2	present (good)  state or condition (as compared to a previous state)		pinqusimineng esla piniightaa \'91the weather is better than it has ever been\'92													present (good) state or condition (as compared to a previous state)		< pi-?-(u)siq				pinqusiq	pinqusiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
pipasaak	gbgfc9r	paper sack or bag		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  pinasaaq													paper sack; paper bag		from English \'91paper sack\'92	SLI			pipasak	pipasxk	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
pipigte-	gbgb[ns-	do something more than previously		esla naaftaqelleghmineng taawa pipigtuq \'91the weather is ever worse than before\'92; atulghiit pipigtut whani pilleghmi, repall iglagiitusimalghiit \'91the drummers are drumming much harder than they usually do, so much that they lost their voices\'92	be some way more than before												to do something more than previously; to be some way more than before		< pi-?-		CK A & W 75		pipigte-	pipigte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1087 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Piqalak	Gb2fkzr	Southwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Southwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.						Piqalak	Piqalak	\uc0\u1055 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \
piraaghagh-, piraghagh-	gbh64f4-. gbhf4f4-	benefit		legan piraghaghtestak angayughqagni angliyalghiimi piyagusalghiimi allughqagkenka \'91well, they certainly are benefiting from the success of their adopted child now that he has grown up and can do things\'92	succeed	advantages (have ~)								new (have something ~)			to benefit; to succeed; to have advantages; to have something new		< pi-?-				piraghagh-, piraghagh-	pirxghagh-, piraghagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -, \u1087 \u1080 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
piraamsi-	gbh6vcb-	careful (be ~)		piraamsiiq \'91he is being meticulous\'92 / piraamsitaa \'91he is being meticulous with it\'92; uyavaqaantaghngaan piraamsilluku ayveq qiinghulluku guusaqegka elqughaghqwaagaqa\'92 although it was quite far, I took pains to aim carefully thus hitting the walrus right on the mark\'92	meticulous (be ~)												to be careful and/or meticulous		< pi-?-				piramsi-	pirxmsi-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1088 \u257 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 -\
piraghyiilliqe-	gbhf4q7k]b2s-	disturb		ivaghiniightet piraghyiilliqestaqii tagitugem \'91the fog is preventing the hunters (keeping them from going out hunting)\'92	impede	bother								prevent			to disturb; to impede; to bother; to prevent	vtifnm	< pi-ragh-yiite-lliqe-		CK Rub 416		piraghyilliqe-	piraghyxlliqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 \u1253 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
pirughhniigh-	gbhe5y]74-	obtain by persistent asking															to obtain by persistent asking	dsghfibdfnm	< pi-?-niigh-		CK Rub 416		pirughhnigh-	pirughhnxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1088 \u1091 \u1203 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
pirughte-	gbhe5ns-	acquire gifts (usually of food) either given through freewill or because of societal obligations		pirughtitigu whangkuta pikaghput \'91give her a gift, she is our kin\'92; pirughhniighyaa maklaglleghhiinun, luuraq upughaksaaghaaten pinilleghmeng tuunyaaghaaten \'91go get some meat from the people who caught a bearded seal since they might, after all, just give you a prize piece if you ask\'92													to acquire gifts (usually of food) either given through freewill or because of societal obligations		< pi-?-				pirughte-	pirughte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1088 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pisaghagh-	gbcz4f4-	provoke		aleni aanyamek pisaghaghaa ellmi estugaghmun maligtesqelluni pisnaniqaq iimna \'91when they went out he tried to persuade his friend to go with him to the store, knowing full well that his friend had been forbidden to do so\'92; pisaghaghluku pillugaghtestuq \'91by provoke him he made him get into a fight with him\'92	challenge	persuade (try to ~ one to do something)								dare			to provoke; to dare; to try to persuade one to do something; to challenge		< pi-?-				pisaghagh-	pisaghagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pisaghtiigh-	gbcf5nb4-	dark (be so ~ that nothing can be seen)		pisaghtiighmi yuuk igleghteghngaaghmi naaglluni siklaasimalghii \'91a man was walking in the dark and he tripped and fell\'92; uksaaghem unuga pisaghtiiq mamlekegtaq \'91the falltime nights are really dark\'92	pitch black (be ~)												to be so dark that nothing can be seen; be pitch black				CK A & W 75		pisaghtigh-	pisaghtxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\
pisighwaagh-	gbcb4164-	delay		aghnaghaq pisighwaaghneghtuuq neghvigmi wata piyukegkaqengilkemminun \'91the girl pretends to be busy when there are customers she doesn't like at the restaurant\'92; pisighwaaghnaqegpenang! \'91don't you dare pretend to be busy when you are asked to do things!\'92; quutkegpenaan, temngi pisighwaaqayuguuq upughalleghmikun \'91don't rely on him since he only pretends to be helpful\'92	stall	pretend								hesitate due to shyness			to delay; to stall; to pretend; to hesitate due to shyness		< pi-sigh-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 2\nosupersub -				pisighwagh-	pisighwxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
pisiqagh-	gbcb2f4-	eat walrus in frozen bite-size pieces		= pesiqagh-													to eat walrus in frozen bite-size pieces						pisiqagh-	pisiqagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pisiqaq	gbcb2f2	walrus meat (frozen, raw, eaten in bite-size pieces)		= pesiqaq													frozen raw walrus meat eaten in bite-size pieces						pisiqaq	pisiqaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b pista\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gbcnf\'a1	doer		pistengughtestekaaguq tamaavek \'91he was appointed to do that\'92; kiyaghtaaghmun pistekaat \'91he is the one behind their success in life\'92	helper	servant											one who does things; helper; servant		< pi-(s)ta				pista1	pista1	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 1\

\f1\b pista\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gbcnf\'99	evil spirit		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 spirit, evil												evil spirit	pkjq le[			CK Rub. 416		pista2	pista2	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 2\
pistangilnguq*	gbcnf3bk3e2	one without a helper or without one to look after him		ellnginaghhaq pistangilnguq awen kayusighyaghtughaqaat \'91they often go help the one who lives alone who doesn\'92t have any one checking on her\'92; akmani pistangilnguut nangllekigatiit \'91in the lower states they don\'92t have compassion for those who have no one to look after them\'92									Rub 411 has pikestangilnguq 				one without a helper or without one to look after him		< pista-(ng)ite-nguq		CK A & W 75		pistangilnguq*	pistangilnguq*	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
pitaagh-	gbn64-	challenge visitors in competitive sports		pitaaghmi pinilghiit yugwet kayaalqiikayuget \'91when they challenge visitors, those who are good physical condition win\'92													to challenge visitors in competitive sports		< pi-?-		CK A & W 75		pitagh-	pitxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
pitegsagh-	gbnsucz4-	shoot (go shooting with bow and arrow)															to go shooting with bow and arrow		PE pit0!ca3- (under PE pit0!-); < pitegte-yagh\super 1\nosupersub -				pitegsagh-	pitegsagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
pitegseghagh-	gbnsucs4f4-	shoot repeatedly															to shoot repeatedly		< pitegte-?-				pitegseghagh-	pitegseghagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Pitegseghaghvik	Gbnsucs4f4dbr	Gambell Mountain (pond and marsh area west of ~)		
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91place for going to shoot arrows\'92; 
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices; 
\f0\i0 = Pitegsighaghvik													pond and marsh area west of Gambell Mountain		pitegte-sagh-?-vik				Pitegseghaghvik	Pitegseghaghvik	\uc0\u1055 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
Pitegsighaghvik	Gbns[cb4f4dbr	Gambell Mountain (pond and marsh area west of ~)		
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91place for going to shoot arrows\'92; 
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices; 
\f0\i0 = Pitegseghaghvik													pond and marsh area west of Gambell Mountain		< pitegte-sigh-?-vik				Pitegsighaghvik	Pitegsighaghvik	\uc0\u1055 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
pitegte-	gbns[ns-	shoot with bow and arrow		pitegtuq \'91he shot\'92; pitegtaa \'91he shot it (animal or target -- not the arrow)\'92 / piitgutaa, pitegtututkaa, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  piitgututkaa \'91he shot it (the arrow)\'92													to shoot with bow and arrow		PE pit0!-				pitegte-	pitegte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pitekesigniigh-	gbnsrscbuy74-	stand on one's toes		pitekesengiightuq \'91he stood on his toes\'92 /													to stand on one's toes						pitekesignigh-	pitekesignxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
pitengllag-	gbns3k]zu-	hit something by flicking or snapping index or middle finger out from under ball of thumb		= pitengllagagh-													to hit something by flicking or snapping index or middle finger out from under ball of thumb						pitengllag-	pitengllag-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 -\
pitengllagagh-	gbns3k]zuf4-	hit something by flicking or snapping index or middle finger out from under ball of thumb											< pitengllag-?-				to hit something by flicking or snapping index or middle finger out from under ball of thumb						pitengllagagh-	pitengllagagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pitiya	gbnbz	boiled reindeer gut			gut (boiled reindeer ~)								check				boiled reindeer gut		perhaps related to Chukchi pitt0k \'91to press out, squeeze out\'92	14			pitiya	pitiya	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1080 \u1103 \
pivag-	gbdfu-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > pivagru-, pivake-, pivag-																			pivag-	pivag-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 -\
pivagnaq	gbdfuyf2	favored child															favored child		< pivag-naq		VK\'92s notes		pivagnaq	pivagnaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
pivagru-	gbdfuhe-	thrifty (be ~)		< pivag-?-	careful (be ~ what which one has)												to be thrifty; to be careful with what one has		hit something by flicking or snapping one's index or middle finger out from under the ball of the thumb				pivagru-	pivagru-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 -\
pivake-	gbdfrs-	prize		pivakaa \'91he prizes it\'92 /	value	protect											to prize; to value; to protect		< pivag-ke\super 2\nosupersub -		gloss 3 CK Rub. 409		pivake-	pivake-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
pivakumtaaq	gbdfrevn62	favored thing or child			prized possession	value (thing of ~)											favored thing or child; prized possession; thing of value		< pivag-qumtaaq				pivakumtaq	pivakumtxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
pivesqite-	gbdsc2bns-	disinclined (be ~ to act)		ima pivesqitestaanga qepghaqamneng aqumtaaghtestepaglunga \'91oh my, he took up all the time during which I would have been working, by sitting here, and now I don't feel like starting to work again\'92; aawhkaghhaaneng pivesqitutkaqaqa \'91I've been putting that off for ages\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  pivigite-	procrastinate	stall or delay								almost ready (be ~ to act)			to be disinclined to act; to procrastinate, stall or delay; to be almost ready to act						pivesqite-	pivesqite-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
pivesqitugh-	gbdsc2bne4-	ready to do something		angyaghteng kenileghnun pivesqilluku utaqiigut \'91they brought their boat to the launching chute ready to leave, and waited\'92	keep handy												to be ready to do something; to keep handy				CK A & W 76		pivesqitugh-	pivesqitugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
pivigilnguq*	gbdbubk3e2	unfavorable (condition that is ~ for action		pivigilnguq esla \'91unfavorable weather\'92; siivanlleghet piiqut esghaamakisqelluta esla piniq quunpeng neqniighmun atuqesqelluku luuraq pivigilnguq esla kaatqaghhnayukan waakenghillemnni \'91the elders tell us to be ready to take advantage of good hunting weather as unfavorable weather can come when one least expects it\'92													condition that is unfavorable for action		< pivigite-nguq				pivigilnguq	pivigilnguq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
pivigite-	gbdbubns-	lack the time or opportunity to act			unfavorable (conditions) for acting (be ~)												to lack the time or opportunity to act; to be unfavorable (conditions) for acting		< pi-vik-(ng)ite-				pivigite-	pivigite-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
piwhani	gb1]fyb	and so		
\f2\i particle; used when one is groping for the right words to express his thoughts; 
\f0\i0  = iwhani	let\'92s see now												and so; let\'92s see now 						piwhani	piwhani	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
piyaa-	gb9-	stroll		piyaaltung esnamun \'91let's\sub 2\nosupersub  take a walk to the beach\'92	walk (take a ~)	visit								hunt by walking on the ice (rather than using a vehicle)			to stroll; to take a walk; to visit; to hunt by walking on the ice (rather than using a vehicle)		< piyug\super 1\nosupersub -?-				piya-	piyx-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1103 \u772 -\
piyaaniigh-	gb9y74-	hunt by walking on the ice (rather than using a vehicle)															to hunt by walking on the ice (rather than using a vehicle)		< piyaa-niigh-				piyanigh-	piyxnxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
piyaqe-	gbz2s-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > piyaqlek, piyaqliigh-, piyaqnagh-, piyaqsug-																			piyaqe-	piyaqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 -\
piyaqlek	gbz2k]sr	ready to carry on (one who is ~)		piyaqleguyaghtughnguq Sivungamun uqughtaaghyaqumi \'91he would have gone ahead to Savoonga, but he was short on gas\'92; piyaqleguuq sivuyagteknaken \'91he\'92s able to go on, so have him as a striker\'92													one who is ready to carry on		< piyaqe-?-		CK A & W 76		piyaqlek	piyaqlek	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1103 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \
piyaqli-	gbz2k]b-	hard time (have a ~)		piyaqliiq kayutkaghqameng ivaghineghmeng \'91he\'92s having a hard time finding someone to help him\'92	difficulty (have ~)												to have a hard time; to have difficulty		< piyaqe-li-				piyaqli-	piyaqli-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1103 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
piyaqnagh-	gbz2yf4-	hard (be ~ to do)			difficult (be ~)												to be hard to do; to be difficult		< piyaqe-nagh-				piyaqnagh-	piyaqnagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1103 \u1179 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
piyaqsug-	gbz2ceu-	difficulty (have ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)													
\f0\i0 to have difficulty	pfnhelyzncz	< piyaqe-yug-		CK V & E 154, Rub 419		piyaqsug-	piyaqsug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1103 \u1179 \u1089 \u1091 \u1075 -\
piyekenghagh-	gbqsrsy4f4-	walk with tiny steps		qikmighaghhaat agalghwaaghaamaghmeng piyekeghaghaqut aanvigmun \'91the puppies are walking with tiny steps while staggering to the exit\'92													to walk with tiny steps	ctvtybnm yjufvb	< piyug
\f1\b \super \'a1
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -?-		CK Rub 410 CK		piyekenghagh-	piyekenghagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b piyug-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gb/u-\super \'a1	\nosupersub walk															to walk		PE piyu!-				piyug-1	piyug-1	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1075 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub piyug-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gb/u-\super \'99	\nosupersub want something or want to do something															to want something or to want do something		< pi-yug-				piyug-2	piyug-2	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1075 -\super 2\
\nosupersub piyugaaghte-	gb/u65ns-	give order(s)															to give order(s)	rjvfyljdfnm			CK Rub 418		piyugaghte-	piyugxghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1075 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
piyugaaq	gb/u62	game			walk in formation	march											a game in which participants walk on a log or similar object trying not to fall off; walk in formation; march		< piyug\super 1\nosupersub -?-		gloss 2, 3 CK Rub 418		piyugaq	piyugxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 \
piyugraapak	gb/4h6gfr	short-tailed albatross			albatross, short-tailed	
\f2\i Ciomedia albatrus							
\f0\i0 given as piyughraapak in SLI Cur. Man. 56				short-tailed albatross 
\f2\i (Ciomedia albatrus)		
\f0\i0 < piyug\super 1\nosupersub -?				piyugrapak	piyugrxpak	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
piyugsiqe-	gb/[cb2s-	feel twitch in one's hair		
\f2\i considered an omen;
\f0\i0  piyugsiqaanga \'91I feel a twitch\'92	twitch (feel ~ in one\'92s hair)												to feel twitch in one's hair		cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik cayu!- \'91to feel a twitch in eye\'92, and consider than that language has ca@u!- \'91to fight\'92 which is pillug- here				piyugsiqe-	piyugsiqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
piyugtugh-	gb/[ne4-	walk quickly or briskly		atangan piyugtughvikaa mekelghiighaq meghaaghmun ateghyan \'91his father strode briskly over to the little boy who had gone into the pond\'92													to walk quickly or briskly		< piyug\super 1\nosupersub -tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				piyugtugh-	piyugtugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
piyuk	gb/r	person walking in the distance		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 piyuk aghuliighumaq \'91the person walking stopped\'92; 
\f2\i apparently a direct nominalization of
\f0\i0  piyug- \'91to walk\'92													a person walking in the distance	xtkjdtr. bleobq dlfk\uc0\u8747 			CK Rub 419		piyuk	piyuk	\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1082 \
piyuke-	gb/rs-	want to have (it)		piyukaa \'91he wants it\'92													to want to have (it)						piyuke-	piyuke-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -\
piyukuman	gb/revfy	gladly		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle;
\f0\i0  ellnga piyukuman qepghaaghaquq \'91he is willingly working\'92	willingly												gladly; willingly	j[jnyj			CK Rub 419		piyukuman	piyukuman	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \
piyutagh-	gb/nf4-	rush around			take a walk												to rush around; to take a walk		< piyug\super 1\nosupersub -		gloss 1 CK Rub 419; gloss 2 CK		piyutagh-	piyutagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
piyutqe-	gb/n2s-	attractive (make oneself ~)		kakinaqelghii panini kaamgegneng piyutqutaa aghnam \'91the woman helped her daughter get started in sewing a pair of boots\'92	groom oneself	start someone off in an activity								get things ready for someone			to make oneself attractive; to groom oneself; to put on makeup or fancy clothes; to get things ready for someone; to start someone off in an activity						piyutqe-	piyutqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1090 \u1179 \u1099 -\
piyuwhaaghmun	gb/[164vey	at the beginning		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle	
\f0\i0 at first	beginning (at the ~)								first (at ~)			at the beginning; at first	dyfxfkt. cyfxfkf. gthdjt dhtvz	< piyug\super 1\nosupersub -(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -
\f2\i terminalis		
\f0\i0 CK Rub 419 CK 		piyuwhaghmun	piyuwhxghmun	\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1102 \u1093 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
puge-	geus-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > puug-, pugimagh-, puglegh-, puglleghragh-, pugnaan, pugnayu-, pugneq, pugsaqa, pugtaghwaagh-, puguluqe-; cf. pukaneq																			puge-	puge-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 -\
pughighnanigh-	ge4b4yfyb4-	involved (be deeply ~ in what one is doing		ulimaaghmeng pughighnaniimaluku kingutaa lengaaq nagaqunghilkanga \'91while he was so absorbed in his ivory carving he didn't hear the bell ring and he was late\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  puughhe-	preoccupied	absorbed (be ~ in one\'92s own actions)											to be deeply involved in what one is doing; be preoccupied; be absorbed in one\'92s own actions						pughighnanigh-	pughighnanigh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\

\f1\b pughpuqa\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ge5ge2f\super \'99	\nosupersub raincoat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 raincoat	lj;ltdbr			CK Rub 426		pughpuqa2	pughpuqa2	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 2\

\f1\b pughpuqa\super e1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ge5ge2f\super s\'a1	\nosupersub edible bitter root of "arctic carrot"			arctic carrot, edible bitter root	
\f2\i Claytonia acutifolia Pall											
\f0\i0 edible bitter root of "arctic carrot" 
\f2\i (Claytonia acutifolia Pall)		
\f0\i0 from Chukchi p\'92upuq \'91edible root\'92				pughpuqae1	pughpuqae1	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1099 1\
pughpuuqa	ge5g82f	edible root type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined									
\f0\i0 needs identification				type of edible root (?)				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 64		pughpuqa	pughpxqa	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1203 \u1087 \u1263 \u1179 \u1072 \

\f1\b pughyuyga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ge4m/quf\super s	\nosupersub wind going the same way (as one\'92s boat)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 anuqatagghaghtaa, pughyuygemeng angyam yugi telanangat nekeftiit \'91the wind picked up, and due to the wind going the same way as the boat is, the crewmen hoisted the sail\'92													wind going the same way (as one\'92s boat)	gjgenysq dtnth	from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 423		pughyuygae	pughyuygae	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1253 \u1075 \u1072 \u1099 \
pugimagh-, pugime-	geubvf4-. geubvs-	swim		pugimaghtuq \'91he swam\'92; pugimaghaa \'91he swam it (the length)\'92 / pugimaghvik \'91swimming pool\'92													to swim		< puge-?-				pugimagh-, pugime-	pugimagh-, pugime-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -, \u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1084 \u1099 -\
pugimenghhaq	geubvsy5f2	seal, young			young seal	calf (seal ~)											young seal; seal calf		< pugime-nghhaq				pugimenghhaq	pugimenghhaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1084 \u1099 \u1085 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
puglegh-	geuks4-	surface (especially in the water)		pugleghtuq \'91it came to the surface\'92 / pugleghtaa \'91he brought it to the surface\'92; qitaaqa sikughagkun pugleghaquq \'91salmon surface with the ice crystals (as they form in the ocean)\'92; aksaqegkaq pugleghtaa \'91he revealed or discovered the secret\'92	come out (said of a secret)												to surface (especially in the water); to come out (said of a secret)		PY-S pu!l03- (under PE pu!0-); < puge-?-				puglegh-	puglegh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
puglegha-	geuks4f-	floating (be ~)															to be floating		< puglegh-?-				puglegha-	puglegha-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 -\
pugleq	geuks2	walrus breathing hole in the ice		pugleghet ayveghem aneghfigkii sikumi meghilngughmi \'91breathing holes are the walrus\'92s place to breath in the ice where there is no open water\'92													walrus breathing hole in the ice		PY-S pu!l03- (under PE pu!0-); < puge-?-				pugleq	pugleq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
puglleghragh-	ge[k]s4hf4-	recall what happened in the past		sugagluni qavngaq amyuutkelleghmineng puglleghraasimakanga \'91he got offended by her recalling his abusiveness in the past\'92													to recall what happened in the past		< puge-?-		CK A & W 76		puglleghragh-	puglleghragh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pugnaan	geuy6y	inflated poke		
\f2\i also 
\f0\i0 pugnaan;
\f2\i  used in the dual,
\f0\i0  pugnaatek, 
\f2\i for one life jacket; 
\f0\i0 = pugnaaquta	poke, inflated	life jacket											inflated poke; life jacket		< puge-?-(u)n				pugnan	pugnxn	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u257 \u1085 \
pugnaaqun	geuy62ey	inflated poke		
\f2\i also 
\f0\i0 pugnaaquta; 
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  pugnaaqutek, 
\f2\i for one life jacket	
\f0\i0 poke, inflated	life jacket											inflated poke; life jacket		< puge-?-(u)n				pugnaqun	pugnxqun	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
pugnayu-	geuyf/-	bouyant (be ~)															to be bouyant		< puge-?-yu-				pugnayu-	pugnayu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1102 -\
pugneq	geuys2	dish of minced reindeer meat, reindeer tallow, and snow															dish of minced reindeer meat, reindeer tallow, and snow		< puge-neq\super 2				\nosupersub pugneq	pugneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
pugsaqa	ge[cz2f	sea water thick with slush ice in late fall or early winter		
\f2\i see item 46 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	beginning of ice formation along the shore	ice that has surfaced from the sea floor								sea ice type			sea water thick with slush ice in late fall or early winter; the beginning of ice formation along the shore; ice that has surfaced from the sea floor		< puge-?		3rd gloss: CK A & W 76		pugsaqa	pugsaqa	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1072 \
pugtaaghwagh-	ge[n641f4-	stay in one spot (of boat)															to stay in one spot (of boat)		< puge-?-		VK\'92s notes		pugtaghwagh-	pugtxghwagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pugtaghtaagh-	ge[nf4n64-	stay surfaced in one spot		aghveq piiqaat tughwaaghyatni pugtaghtuq \'91they say there was a whale, and as they were approaching it it stayed surfaced in the same place\'92; pugtaghtaaghumaluku kaalluku aghveqaat \'91while it was staying surfaced they got to it and struck it\'92													to stay surfaced in one spot		< puge-?-		CK A & W 76		pugtaghtagh-	pugtaghtxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
pugtaghwaagh-	g8[nf4164-	stay surfaced in one spot															to stay surfaced in one spot		< puge-?-		2nd gloss: CK A & W 76		pugtaghwagh-	pugtaghwxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
Pugughileghmii(t)	Geue4bks4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< Pugughileq-mii			xxxt	Pugughileghmi(t)	Pugughileghmx(t)	\u1055 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Pugughileq	Geue4bks2	Powooiliak on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Southwest Cape site on St. Lawrence Is.												Powooiliak on St. Lawrence Is.; Southwest Cape site on St. Lawrence Is.						Pugughileq	Pugughileq	\uc0\u1055 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
Pugughillghaq	Geue4bk5f2	Kiveepuk Bay (site on ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on Kiveepuk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.				Yupik Lore, vol 2, pg. 72		Pugughillghaq	Pugughillghaq	\uc0\u1055 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
pugughuq, pugughyi	geue4e2. geue4qb	fat on outside of stomach															fat on outside of stomach						pugughuq, pugughyi	pugughuq, pugughyi	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 , \u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1253 \u1080 \
pugughyaaq	geue4m92	bird net used in winter		pugughyaaghluku ugani qawiimalghiit kangitegni \'91they caught a lot of birds at the ice bay by bird net\'92; ayumiq pugughyaaq atuqepigsaqangat \'91in the old days, they would really use the bird net\'92													bird net used in winter				CK A & W 77		pugughyaq	pugughyxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
puguluqe--	geuek/2s-	stir up sediment in a liquid		puguluqaa \'91he stirred the sediment up in it\'92 /													to stir up sediment in a liquid		< puge-?-				puguluqe--	puguluqe--	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 -\
pukaneq	gerfys2	foam		qaneghmikun pukanghuusan suflitaghtaat meghmeng nusugyamegteggu \'91when foam began to form at his mouth they put him face down after pulling him from the water\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  puge-	froth	suds											foam; froth; suds						pukaneq	pukaneq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
pukfig-	gerabu-	ransack		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  ellngan pukfigaqii sanqutani \'91he is digging around in his stuff\'92; = pekfig-	dig around in												to ransack; to dig around in	gtht,bhfnm			CK Rub. 424		pukfig-	pukfig-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1075 -\
pula-	gekz-	go into the midst of a group of things in which one becomes hidden from view			go between somewhat scattered floes of sea ice								pulagh- in Siberian (Rub. 425)				to go into the midst of a group of things in which one becomes hidden from view; to go between somewhat scattered floes of sea ice		< PE pula-				pula-	pula-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 -\
pulataaq	gekfn62	whale, eating, which then goes under the shore ice		pulataaq esghaghluku uplegusimaat \'91they saw a whale eating, and they went after it\'92; pulataaghet tamaakut atghaamaneghtupiggniiqiit \'91they say whales that are eating usually stay long when they dive\'92													a whale eating which then goes under the shore ice		< pula-?-aq				pulataq	pulatxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1083 \u1072 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b puliisa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gek7cf\super s	\nosupersub policeman		puliiset \'91the police\'92													policeman		from English \'91police\'92	SLI			pulisae	pulxsae	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1089 \u1072 \u1099 \
pultughaq	gek]ne4f2	fishing sinker															fishing sinker						pultughaq	pultughaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
pumsug-	gevceu-	pinch															to pinch	obgktn	< pumyu!-		CK V & E 190 CK		pumsug-	pumsug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1091 \u1075 -\
pumsugek	gevc/usr	thumb and forefinger		
\f2\i this is a dual;
\f0\i0  pumsugegka \'91my pliers, thumb and forefinger, etc.\'92; 
\f2\i the singular would be
\f0\i0  pumsuk	pliers (pair of ~)	tweezers								vise			thumb and forefinger; pair of pliers; tweezers; vise						pumsugek	pumsugek	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1099 \u1082 \
pumsugragh-	gevc/uhf4-	pinch repeatedly															to pinch repeatedly		< pumsug-ragh-		VK\'92s notes		pumsugragh-	pumsugragh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pumsugun	gevc/uey	strip, thin, of folded sealskin sewn in a seam			welt												thin strip of folded sealskin sewn in a seam; welt		< pumsug-(u)n				pumsugun	pumsugun	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
pumsukegtaatek	gevc/rs[n6nsr	scissors		
\f2\i this is a dual; the singular would be 
\f0\i0 pumsukegtaata 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  pumsukegtaan													scissors		< pumsug-kegtagh-(u)ta-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 pumsukegtatek	pumsukegtxtek	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
pumsukegtagh-	gevcers[nf4-	cut with scissors															to cut with scissors		< pumsug-?-		CK Rub 425 CK		pumsukegtagh-	pumsukegtagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pumsukesengiigh-	gevc/rscs374-	handle only with thumb and forefinger (as to avoid being dirtied)															to handle only with thumb and forefinger (as to avoid being dirtied)		< pumsug-?-				pumsukesengigh-	pumsukesengxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1251 \u1271 -\
pumsukgun	gevcer[ey	seam edging		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 edging (seam ~)								is this right? 				seam edging	rfyn idf	< pumsug-?-(u)n		CK Rub 425		pumsukgun	pumsukgun	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1091 \u1082 \u1093 \u1091 \u1085 \
pumsumsi-	gevcevcb-	eat by picking food with fingers		pumsumsifqaavek pinitun neghi emta \'91don\'92t pick around your food with your fingers, eat properly\'92; whaken pumsumsiighllanga? \'91can I pick around from this food?\'92													to eat by picking food with fingers		< pumsug-		CK A & W 77		pumsumsi-	pumsumsi-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 -\
punegte-	geys[ns-	strike with an explosive at (it \'96 whale) to kill it		punegtilghiimeng nutaan esghaatunga \'91I saw bomb striking for the first time\'92; taan\'92ga puneghqughaqaat \'91they are striking it with explosives out there\'92; puneglleghhaaten aghvengegkata \'91you, strike it with the explosive when they catch a whale\'92													to strike with an explosive at (it \'96 whale) to kill it				CK A & W 77 CK 		punegte-	punegte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Pungughmii(t)	Ge3e4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)		
\f2\i from the Punuk Islands													
\f0\i0 a particular clan		Punguq-mii			xxxt	Pungughmi(t)	Pungughmx(t)	\uc0\u1055 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Punguqusighmii(t)	Ge3e2ecb4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< Punguqusiq-mii			xxxt	Punguqusighmi(t)	Punguqusighmx(t)	\u1055 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Punguqusiq	Ge3e2ecb2	Pongokosit Spit by Niyrakpak Lagoon (Naayvaghpak) on St. lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Pongokosit Spit by Niyrakpak Lagoon (Naayvaghpak) on St. lawrence Is.		< Punguq-?				Punguqusiq	Punguqusiq	\uc0\u1055 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
Punguuk	Ge38r	Punuk Island(s) off the southeast coast of St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i the singular form is 
\f0\i0 Punguq*;
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 Punguuk
\f2\i  is a dual indicating the two (main) islands 
\f0\i0 (Ingalik 
\f2\i and 
\f0\i0 Puusuuk)
\f2\i ; the third and smallest island is 
\f0\i0 Qiighqaq
\f2\i ; see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Punuk Island(s) off the southeast coast of St. Lawrence Is.						Punguk	Pungxk	\uc0\u1055 \u1091 \u1187 \u1263 \u1082 \
pupigtaa-	gegb[n6-	sores (get scabby ~ all over)		pupigtaaguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  pupigtaagaa \'91he got sores all over\'92 /													to get scabby sores all over		< pupik-?-				pupigta-	pupigtx-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 -\
pupik	gegbr	skin sore			scabby sore	scum on lake coast near drying water								sore, on skin, scabby			skin sore; scabby sore; scum on lake coast near drying water		PE pupig		CK V & E 40 		pupik	pupik	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
pupingqugh-	gegb32e4-	stinging sensation (have a ~ on one's fingers from touching a very cold ) 															to have a stinging sensation on one's fingers from touching a very cold object		PE pupi&qu3- and puvi&qu3-				pupingqugh-	pupingqugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
puqig-	ge2bu-	intelligent (be ~)		puqigtuq \'91he is smart\'92 /	smart (be ~)	quick to learn (be ~)											to be intelligent; to be smart; to be quick to learn		PE puqi!-				puqig-	puqig-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1075 -\
puqla	ge2k]z	warmth			heat												warmth; heat		PE puqla		gloss 3 CK Rub 424		puqla	puqla	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
puqlangllaasiq	ge2k]z3k]9cb2	heater		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  puqlangllaasik
\f2\i , for one heater	
\f0\i0 space heater												heater; space heater		< puqla-ngllagh-(u)siq				puqlangllasiq	puqlangllxsiq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
puqlate-	ge2k]zns-	warm (be ~)		puqlatuq \'91it is warm\'92 / puqlalnguq \'91warm place, warm weather\'92													to be warm		< puqla-te\super \'a3\nosupersub -				puqlate-	puqlate-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1090 \u1099 -\
puqlayaag-	ge2k]z9u-	warm (be very ~)			sweaty (be ~)												to be very warm; to be sweaty		< puqla-?-				puqlayag-	puqlayxg-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 -\
puqlayug-	ge2k]z/u-	hot (feel ~)			sweaty (be ~)												to feel hot; to be sweaty		< puqla-yug-				puqlayug-	puqlayug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1102 \u1075 -\
puqlegha-	ge2k]s4f-	fever (have ~)															to have fever		< puqla-?-				puqlegha-	puqlegha-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 -\
puqleghaaq	ge2k]s46r	warm weather in winter															warm weather in winter		< puqla-?-				puqleghaq	puqleghxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1082 \
puqleghaq	ge2k]s4f2	thaw		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)
\f0\i0 ; uyghaget qiighnaamat January-m puqleghaghaneng ama ilangqullghaneng \'91the rocks are slippery during the thaw and freeze of January\'92									 is this right??? this might be the SLI puqleghaaq?				thaw	jnntgtkm			CK Rub 424		puqleghaq	puqleghaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
puraara	geh6hz	slave															slave	hf,	from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 425		purara	purxra	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1088 \u257 \u1088 \u1103 \
Pureki	Gehsrb	African		
\f2\i probably so called due to the relatively dark hue of the skin of the Portuguese sailers (including those from Portuguese colonies in Africa) encountered by the people of St. Lawrence Island; 
\f0\i0 \'85 Richard Atkiskun. Aghvengyupigtuuq 
\f2\i Pureki
\f0\i0  elngaatall. \'91\'85 Richard Atkiskun. He was a 
\f2\i Black
\f0\i0  man, vey good at catchin whales.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:122)	African-American	Black person											African; African-American; Black person		probably from English \'91Portugee\'92 (non-standard for \'91Portugese\'92)	SLI			pureki	pureki	\uc0\u1055 \u1091 \u1088 \u1099 \u1082 \u1080 \
pusguma	gec[evf	droopy-eared dog or other animal		qikmiq pusguma qaga uglaaghighllagtuq \'91droopy-eared dogs are increasing out there\'92													droopy-eared dog or other animal				CK A & W 77		pusguma	pusguma	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1089 \u1093 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \
pusi	gecb	cat		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 cat		from English \'91pussy\'92	Chuk.	R426, V&E52		pusi	pusi	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \
pusigte-	gecb[ns-	take pull back one\'92s hood		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to pull back one\'92s hood				CK Rub 426		pusigte-	pusigte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
put	gen	port (left side of boat)		
\f2\i adverbial particle; see also 
\f0\i0 tavet													port (left side of boat)		from English \'91port\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 161		put	put	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \
Putkut	Genren	plateau inland north of Poowooiliak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 plateau inland north of Poowooiliak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.						Putkut	Putkut	\uc0\u1055 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \
putu	gene	hole made on edge of skin for running rope through it to attach it to stretching/drying rack															hole made on edge of skin for running rope through it to attach it to stretching/drying rack		PE putu(-)				putu	putu	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \
putu-	gene-	make a hole on the edge of a skin for running rope through it to stretch and dry it															to make a hole on the edge of a skin for running rope through it to stretch and dry it		PE putu(-)				putu-	putu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 -\
putukaaq	gener62	walrus hibernating in the water, laying on its back															a walrus hibernating in the water, laying on its back						putukaq	putukxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u257 \u1179 \
putukumyug-, putukumsug-	generev/u-. generevc/u-	tiptoe fast		putukumyugtuq \'91he tiptoed fast\'92; putukumyugaa \'91he tiptoed over or on it\'92 /													to tiptoe fast		< putukuq-msug-				putukumyug-, putukumsug-	putukumyug-, putukumsug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1102 \u1075 -, \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
putukuq	genere2	big toe		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 putu	toe, big												big toe		PE  putuku3				putukuq	putukuq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \
putulghi	genek4b	loop of sealskin for holding lace to boot			rope piece for stringing something	string piece for stringing someting											loop of sealskin for holding lace to boot; piece of rope or string for stringing something		< putu-?-				putulghi	putulghi	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u1080 \
putulqagh-	genek2f4-	dance a jig-like dance															to dance a jig-like dance						putulqagh-	putulqagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
pututati	genenfnb	two (the number ~ in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)		
\f2\i the entire jingle is:
\f0\i0  aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'	counting jingle (the number \'91two\'92 in a ~ or finger naming for children)	jingle (the number \'91two\'92 in a counting or finger naming ~ for children)											the number two (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)						pututati	pututati	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1080 \

\f1\b putuugh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gen84-\super \'a1	\nosupersub holes (make a series of ~)															to make a series of holes		< putu-ugh-				putugh-1	putxgh-1	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1263 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub putuugh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gen84-\super \'99	\nosupersub dance a certain dance related to whaling in which both the hands and body are in motion															to dance a certain dance related to whaling in which both the hands and body are in motion						putugh-2	putxgh-2	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1263 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub putuulleq	gen8k]s2	edge of skin with holes in it for lacing															edge of skin with holes in it for lacing		< putuugh\super 1\nosupersub -lleq				putulleq	putxlleq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
putuuq	gen82	dance related to whaling in which both the hands and body are in motion															a certain dance related to whaling in which both the hands and body are in motion						putuq	putxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1263 \u1179 \
puu	g8	shaft-type handle		Elngaatall qevuulluni pugimnaqutkesalghiimi qenwat alquutaghpegem 
\f2\i puunga
\f0\i0  kaasimakanga. \'93Uggiiy!\'94 pimalghii pekaamaghmi 
\f2\i puumun
\f0\i0  uugsimaghmi. \'91By trying as hard as he could to swim he finally reached the 
\f2\i handle
\f0\i0  of the big spoon. \'93Whew!\'94 he said as he gasped and climbed onto the 
\f2\i handle
\f0\i0 .\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG.  12)	handle, shaft-type	stem of plant								handle of saucepan, skillet, etc.			shaft-type handle; stem of plant; handle of saucepan, skillet, etc.		PE  0pu				pu	px	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \
puufqe-	g8a2s-	swollen (become ~ in the face)															to become swollen on the face		< puuve-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				pufqe-	pxfqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1092 \u1179 \u1099 -\
puug-	g8u-	surface (come to the ~)		puugtuq \'91it poked its head out from the water\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 pukaneq	come up for air (of whales)	poke the head out from the water (of sea mammals)											to surface; to come up for air (of whales); to poke the head out from the water (of sea mammals)						pug-	pxg-	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1075 -\
puuggaghaghtugh-	g8[f4f5ne4-	change the subject of conversation quickly		iqlengiqutkellghaneng elqughtuaghluku puuggaghtaghqumakanga \'91she him corrected about his lieing, and he tried to change the subject\'92; puuggaghaghtaakun sighlatkumakanga \'91she confronted him even as he was trying to change the subject\'92													to quickly change the subject of conversation				CK A & W 77		puggaghaghtugh-	pxggaghaghtugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1093 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
puughhe-	g85s-	amused (be ~ (of a child))		puughhuq \'91he is amused\'92 / taghnughhaq puughheritaaghtuq \'91the baby is amusing himself\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 pughighnanigh-													to be amused (of a child)						pughhe-	pxghhe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1203 \u1099 -\
puughhun	g85ey	toy			amusement	fun											toy; amusement; fun		< puughhe-(u)n				pughhun	pxghhun	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1203 \u1091 \u1085 \
puughseghagh-	g15cs4f4-	lie and try to convince		puughseghaghpenaki taghnughhat \'91don\'92t to lie and try to make the children believe you\'92; taana ilamineng puughseghaghnaqlaataghtuq \'91he\'92s going to lie again and try to convince his relatives\'92													to lie and try to convince		< puughhe-?-		CK A & W 77		pughseghagh-	pxghseghagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1265 \u1203 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
puughte-	g85ns-	deceive		puughtaa \'91he deceived him\'92 / puughlluten piimken \'91I was just kidding you\'92; kii, puughhneqegtuten elngaatall! \'91my, you are gullible!\'92	mislead	babysit								amuse			to deceive or mislead; to kid or fool; to babysit or amuse		< puughe-te\super 1\nosupersub -				pughte-	pxghte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
puughtista	g85nbcnf	babysitter															babysitter		< puughte-i\super 1\nosupersub -(s)ta				pughtista	pxghtista	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1203 \u1090 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
puuglluk	g8[k]/r	suds			foam or froth	flotsam								residue of melted fat of a sea mammal			suds; foam or froth; flotsam; residue of melted fat of a sea mammal		< puug-lluk				puglluk	pxglluk	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
puugpag-	g8[gfu-	blister forms			protrude from water (of sea mammal)												for a blister to form; to protrude from water (of sea mammal)		< puug-pag-				pugpag-	pxgpag-	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
puugpagtaq	g8[gf[nf2	flash			spark	sound of match bursting into flame											flash; spark; the sound of a match bursting into flame		< puugpagte-aq				pugpagtaq	pxgpagtaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
puugpagte-	g8[gf[ns-	burst into flame															to burst into flame		< puugpak-?-				pugpagte-	pxgpagte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
puugpak	g8[gfr	match, large wooden, for lighting fire															large wooden match (for lighting fire)						pugpak	pxgpak	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
puugzaq	g8upz2	beluga		
\f2\i the sequence
\f0\i0  za 
\f2\i in this word is phonologically very unusual in Yupik	Delphinapterus leucas												
\f0\i0 beluga (Delphinapterus leucas)		PY-S pu!zaq; < puge-?	05			pugzaq	pxgzaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1075 \u1079 \u1103 \u1179 \
puugzaq tugutelek	g8upf2 neuensksr	narwhal		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  'beluga with a tusk'	
\f2\i Monodon monceros												
\f0\i0 narwhal (Monodon monceros)		< puugzaq + tugun-lek			xxxt	pugzaq tugutelek	pxgzaq tugutelek	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1075 \u1079 \u1072 \u1179  \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
puulqughruk	g8k2e4her	stem of plant		= puunqughruk													stem of plant		< puu-quq-ghruk				pulqughruk	pxlqughruk	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1083 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \

\f1\b puuma\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub g8vf\super s	\nosupersub boom holding sail out from mast		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 spar												boom holding sail out from mast; spar		from English \'91boom\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R425)		
\f0\i0 pumae	pxmae	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
puungqughruk	g832e4her	stem of plant		= puulqughruk, puunqughruk													stem of plant		< puu-quq-ghruk				pungqughruk	pxngqughruk	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
puunqughruk	g8y2e4her	stem of plant		= puulqughruk, puungqughruk													stem of plant		< puu-quq-ghruk				punqughruk	pxnqughruk	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
puurqi	g8i2b	beads (string of ~ on short leather thong used for decoration at the closed ends of baby\'92s traditional snowsuit)			bead string (part of the opening to the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house)								
\f2\i see Parts of Traditional House in Appendix				
\f0\i0 string of beads on short leather thong used for decoration at the closed ends of baby\'92s traditional snowsuit; part of the opening to the 
\f2\i aagra, 
\f0\i0 the
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		from Chukchi ? (cf. puc\'92eqey \'91sleeve, collar\'92)				purqi	pxrqi	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1096 \u1179 \u1080 \
puuru	g8he	contrary to what one might have expected or wanted		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  malghugneghet angyat aghveghniightut iwernga sivuliit aghuliitut; enkaam puuru taakut aallghit uka taglaghtut \'91two boats are out whaling; one is staying in one spot, and, on the other hand, the other one is heading back this way\'92; taginaqnikaput tengegkayuget taginghitut puuru allat waakenghilkaput tagiit \'91the plane we thought was coming didn't come, instead another one we didn't expect came\'92; Llaaghanwha mekelghiighhaak ivaghiniightengughtuk. 
\f2\i Puuru
\f0\i0  yuuk mughunnanightuq. \'91And the two boys became hunters. The man, 
\f2\i on the other hand
\f0\i0 , stopped going out to hunt.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 38)	on the other hand	instead								ironically			contrary to what one might have expected or wanted; on the other hand; instead; ironically		from Chukchi puur\'92u \'91instead\'92				puru	pxru	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1088 \u1091 \
puuskaan, puuskaana	g8cr6y. g8cr6yf	whaling harpoon or gun		
\f2\i the harpoon has an explosive charge which further drives it into the whale after first contact;
\f0\i0  
\f2\i plural: 
\f0\i0 puuskaatet 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  puuskaanet; Enkaam taaqenghata, 
\f2\i puuskaatet
\f0\i0  aghnam ighungita akulangiikun aghvequtaqiit. \'91And when these things were finished they take the 
\f2\i whaling harpoon
\f0\i0  and thrust it (into the snow) between the legs of the wife (of the captain).\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:218)	harpoon for whaling	darting gun											whaling harpoon or gun; darting gun		from Russian geirf (pushka) 'gun' and the Yupik postbase -(u)n \'91device\'92, or from English \'91push\'92 and \'91gun\'92	SLI			puskan, puskana	pxskxn, pxskxna	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1089 \u1082 \u257 \u1085 , \u1087 \u1263 \u1089 \u1082 \u257 \u1085 \u1072 \
Puusuuk	H8c0r	Punuk Islands off the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is. (northeasternmost of the ~)		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 northeasternmost of the Punuk Islands off the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is.						Pusuk	Pxsxk	\uc0\u1056 \u1263 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1082 \
puutaraaq	g1nfh62	frying pan		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)	
\f0\i0 bucket with handle												frying pan; bucket with handle				CK V & E 89; Rub 426		putaraq	pxtarxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1265 \u1090 \u1072 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
puuve-	g8ds-	swell (often of a body part)		puuvuq \'91it got swollen\'92 /													to swell (often of a body part)		< puve-				puve-	pxve-	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1074 \u1099 -\
puuvlagh-	g8dkz4-	smell or sense something and be scared off (of sea mammals)		neghsam puuvlaamaa qantaghallillgha mughunniightem \'91the seal sensed the approach of the hunter\'92													to smell or sense something and be scared off (of sea mammals)						puvlagh-	pxvlagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1074 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 -\
puuvngiite-	g8d37ns-	swelling goes down															to have one\'92s swelling go down		< puuve-nga-(ng)ite-				puvngite-	pxvngxte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1074 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
puuvyaq	g8dmz2	inflatable membrane in walrus mouth		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 crop of a bird												inflatable membrane in walrus mouth; crop of a bird		PE puvya3; < puuve-?-		CK Rub 422		puvyaq	pxvyaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1263 \u1074 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
puvalla	gedfk]z	ceremony held annually by a family or clan at the time of a new moon involving the offering of choice pieces of meat		= vuvalla													ceremony held annually by a family or clan at the time of a new moon involving the offering of choice pieces of meat		PE puva@a				puvalla	puvalla	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
puvallate-	gedfk]zns-	hold the annual ceremony at the time of the new moon															to hold the annual ceremony at the time of the new moon		< puvalla-?-				puvallate-	puvallate-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1090 \u1099 -\
puvangitaghaq	gedf3bnf4f2	Pacific herring			
\f2\i Clupea harengus												
\f0\i0 Pacific herring
\f2\i  (Clupea harengus)				
\f0\i0 SLI Cur. Man. 53		puvangitaghaq	puvangitaghaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
puve-	geds-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > puuve-, puvin, puvngellak															PE puv0-				puve-	puve-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 -\
puveltu	gedskne	lemming		= vuveltu	
\f2\i Lemmus sp.												
\f0\i0 lemming (Lemmus sp.)		PY-S puv0ltu, or from Chukchi w0wcelkal&0n \'91lemmming or vole?\'92 (if this Chukchi word is not in fact borrowed from Eskimo)				puveltu	puveltu	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1090 \u1091 \
puvin	gedby	trimming of fur on hat		
\f2\i also plural,
\f0\i0  puvitet, 
\f2\i for one ruff; 
\f0\i0 puviteten amaangwaat? \'91is your ruff wolf?\'92; = vuvin	ruff on parka hood												ruff on parka hood; fur trimming on hat		< puve-?-(u)n				puvin	puvin	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \
puvisaaq	gedbc92	bangs (hair)		Naama 
\f2\i puvisaaghenka
\f0\i0  kepii. \'91My mother cut my 
\f2\i bangs
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 133)	fog that covers top part of mountains												bangs (hair); fog that covers top part of mountains		< puvin-? (?)				puvisaq	puvisxq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
puvngellak	ged3sk]zr	swollen face or eyes (one with ~)															one with swollen face or eyes		< puve-?-				puvngellak	puvngellak	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
puvrugh-	gedhe4-	rounded (become ~ and dull (of knife edge, pick point, etc.))		savika puvruqaq ipegsaghyaghqaaghsimaaq \'91my knife that has become dull has to be sharpened now\'92; ukistani puvrughyan muusimakanga ipegsaqiisqelluku \'91when his ice pick became dull, he had someone sharpen it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  puve-	dull (become rounded and ~ (of knife edge, pick point, etc.))												to become rounded and dull (of knife edge, pick point, etc.)				CK A & W 78		puvrugh-	puvrugh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1088 \u1091 \u1271 -\
puvug-	gedeu-	peck (of a bird)		puvugtuq \'91it pecked\'92; puvugaa \'91it pecked it\'92 /													to peck (of a bird)		PE puvu!-				puvug-	puvug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1075 -\
Puvughpak	Gede5gfr	Poovookpuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Poovookpuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		< Puvu(t)-ghpak				Puvughpak	Puvughpak	\uc0\u1055 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
puvughqu-	gede52e-	pick around with the beak (of a bird)		meteghlluk egtelleghni puvughqwaaqeftuq \'91a raven was picking around at the dump\'92; naghuyat esnami mallu puvughqaaqeftaat \'91seagulls were picking with their beaks at a animal carcass\'92													to pick around with the beak (of a bird)		< puvug-ghqu- (?)				puvughqu-	puvughqu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 -\
puvugragh-	gedeuhf4-	peck continuously or repeatedly															to peck continuously or repeatedly		< puvug-ragh-				puvugragh-	puvugragh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
puvukiiraagh-	geder7h64-	peck intermittently															to peck intermittently		< puvug-?-				puvukiragh-	puvukxrxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1082 \u1251 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
Puvut	Geden	Poovoot Range on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Poovoot Range on St. Lawrence Is.		< \'93-
\f2\i plural
\f0\i0  (?)				Puvut	Puvut	\uc0\u1055 \u1091 \u1074 \u1091 \u1090 \
puya	gez	rancid residue of oil from blubber															rancid residue of oil from blubber		PE puya				puya	puya	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1103 \
puyani	gezyb	smell of rancid oil															smell of rancid oil		< puya-ni\super 2\nosupersub -				puyani	puyani	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \
puygu-	geque-	forget		puyguuq \'91he forgot\'92; puywaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  puygaa \'91he forgot it\'92 / puyguyaqunaan \'91don't forget it\'92													to forget		PE puy!u(3)-				puygu-	puygu-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 -\
puygutagh-	gequenf4-	forgetful (be ~)															to be forgetful		< puygu-tagh\super 3\nosupersub -				puygutagh-	puygutagh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
puyughiitaq	ge/47nf2	mat used to protect surface from soot when putting down a sooty pot or other thing															mat used to protect surface from soot when putting down a sooty pot or other thing		< puyuq-ghiitaq				puyughitaq	puyughxtaq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1102 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
puyughpak	ge/5gfr	vapor over an open area in the winter ice															vapor over an open area in the winter ice		< puyuq-ghpak				puyughpak	puyughpak	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1102 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
puyughraak	ge/4h6r	smoke, slowly rising or rising in the distance		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  tengegkayugmeng aliisimaaq puyughraak suflugmeng nunaaghmi \'91smoke coming out of a chimney at the village was visible from the airplane\'92													slowly rising smoke; smoke rising at a distance		< puyuq-raak		CK Rub 427		puyughrak	puyughrxk	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1102 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
puyughte-	geqe5ns-	darken (it)		qiipateng aghnat kakilghiit tagneghlimeng puyughtaqluki kakiiqut \'91women darken their sewing thread with a soft rock substance\'92													to darken (it)		< puyuq-?-		CK A & W 78; Rub 427		puyughte-	puyughte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1253 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
puyughuute-	ge/48ns-	spout (of a whale)			vapor (give off puffs of ~ or smoke)												to spout (of a whale); to give off puffs of vapor or smoke		< puyuq-?-				puyughute-	puyughxte-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1102 \u1271 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
puyumsug-	gevc/u-	hold between thumb and forefinger		pumsugaa \'91he pinched it\'92 /	pinch												to hold between thumb and forefinger; to pinch		PE pumyu!-				puyumsug-	puyumsug-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
puyumsugraagh-	gevc/uh64-	pinch repeatedly															to keep pinching; to pinch repeatedly		< pumsug-?-				puyumsugragh-	puyumsugrxgh-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
puyuq	ge/2	smoke			soot												smoke; soot		PE puyu3				puyuq	puyuq	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1102 \u1179 \
puyuqe-	ge/2s-	sooty (become ~)		puyuqaa \'91it became sooty\'92													to become sooty		< puyuq-?-				puyuqe-	puyuqe-	\uc0\u1087 \u1091 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qa	2f			
\f2\i particle; expresses exasperation																			
\f0\i0 qa	qa	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \

\f1\b qaa\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 26\'a1	is that so? really?		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 qaa agavek piyaqumtung itagnaghnayaghtuq \'91I wonder if we went there whether it would be okay\'92; qaa whaten pinightuq \'91perhaps it's better this way\'92; Apaay, ungipaghaa. Apaay, ungipaghaa. Ungipaghaa 
\f2\i qaa
\f0\i0  Apaay. \'91Grandpa, tell a story. Grandpa, tell a story. Tell a story, 
\f2\i okay
\f0\i0 , grandpa.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. II:14); Ukughsi, angyanga 
\f2\i qaa
\f0\i0 ? Enkaam 
\f2\i qaa
\f0\i0  iguyaanga. \'91Hey you people, he got a boat, 
\f2\i right
\f0\i0 ? And then I\'92ll be striker, 
\f2\i okay?
\f0\i0 \'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:216)	okay?	perhaps								go ahead then (okay, ~)			is that so?; okay?; perhaps; I wonder if; okay, go ahead then		PE q(q)a(q) (enclitic)				qa1	qx1	\uc0\u1179 \u257 1\

\f1\b qaa\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 26\'99	head sore		qaaka \'91my head sore\'92; qaaghllagluni ayuquq \'91she is covered with head sores\'92	impetigo												sore on head; impetigo						qa2	qx2	\uc0\u1179 \u257 2\
Qaagaam Naayvaa	@6u6v Y6qd6	Akfayagak Creek (Aqfayegaak)[lake-like widening right up from where ~ empties in to Niyrakpak Lagoon (Naayvaghpak)] 		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 lake-like widening right up from where Akfayagak Creek (Aqfayegaak) empties in to Niyrakpak Lagoon (Naayvaghpak)				< qaagaaq-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + naayvaq-
\f2\i possessed	
\f0\i0 xxxn	Qagam Nayva	Qxgxm Nxyvx	\uc0\u1178 \u257 \u1075 \u257 \u1084  \u1053 \u257 \u1253 \u1074 \u257 \
qaagna	26uyf	outside one		
\f2\i base: 
\f0\i0 qag-; 
\f2\i extended demonstrative pronoun; singular relative pronoun: 
\f0\i0 qagum \'91(of) the one outside\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun:
\f0\i0  qaagkut \'91those outside\'92; 
\f2\i vocative:
\f0\i0  qaagyuq \'91you, out there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun:
\f0\i0  tesqagna 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esqagna \'91that one outsid\'92e; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  qagani \'91out there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  qagavek \'91to out there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 qaaggun \'91through out there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb: 
\f0\i0 qaagken \'91from out there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional:
\f0\i0  qaga \'91there (out there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb:
\f0\i0  tesqagani or esqagani \'91there, out there\'92; qaga qaniguuq \'91it is snowing out there\'92; tesqagani igleghutaqut tourist-et \'91the tourists are walking around out there\'92													that one outside; outside						qagna	qxgna	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
qaake-	26rs-	put something up on an elevated place (as on a shelf)		qaakaa \'91he put it up\'92 / qaakigu llivelghagnun \'91put it up on the shelf\'92; angyamelnguuk evinrude-ek qaakaak \'91the took the outboard motor in the boat and set it on the ground	put something on land (or ice) from a boat in the water												to put something up on an elevated place (as on a shelf); to put something on land (or ice) from a boat in the water		PE qak0-				qake-	qxke-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qaakleq	26rk]s2	boat, skin, part (block set at point where gunwales join stern and bow pieces)		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 part of a skin boat (block set at point where gunwales join stern and bow pieces)						qakleq	qxkleq	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
qaakneghet	26ry]s4sn	herd of walrus on ice floe		
\f2\i this is a plural; singular would be
\f0\i0  qaakneq													herd of walrus on ice floe		< qaake-neq\super 2\nosupersub -
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 qakneghet	qxkneghet	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \
qaalghwaak	26k416r	snow, fine															fine snow						qalghwak	qxlghwxk	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1082 \
qaalkaqe-	26k]rf2s-	sarcastic (make ~ remarks)		qaalkaqusimalukek nanevgam aghyughumakek \'91when they made pointed remarks to each other, the old man scolded them\'92	insinuating (make ~ remarks)												to make sarcastic, insinuating, or pointed remarks		; < qalleg-?-				qalkaqe-	qxlkaqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qaalkaqu-	26k]rf2e-	express a strong opinion		qaalkaquuq \'91he expressed his strong opinion\'92 /													to express a strong opinion		< qalleg-?-		VK		qalkaqu-	qxlkaqu-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
qaalkaqute-	26k]rf2ens-	argue against each other		sameng apalluqullutek qaalkaqusimalghii \'91they didn\'92t agree with each other, so they argued\'92; qaalkaqullghiit yugwem takuluki ineghsimii \'91the person went to those arguing and told them not to do so\'92													to argue against each other				CK A & W 79		qalkaqute-	qxlkaqute-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaallgigate-	26k][bufns-	quiet (be a ~ person)			reserved (be ~)	taciturn (be ~)											to be a quiet person; to be reserved; to be taciturn		< qalleg-(ng)igate-				qallgigate-	qxllgigate-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaallgitugh-	26k][bne4-	important statement (make an ~)															to make an important statement		< qalleg-?-		VK		qallgitugh-	qxllgitugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qaallgute-	26k][ens-	tell		qaallgutaa \'91he said something to him\'92 / Nanevgaghllagem ugategnilnguum 
\f2\i qaallgutaa
\f0\i0 , \'93Kaamgegka ukuk aatikek qiighniilnguuk.\'94 The old man near the exit 
\f2\i said to
\f0\i0  him, \'93put on these boots; they aren\'92t slippery.\'94 (SULUWET 95)	say something to												to tell; to say something to		< qalleg-(u)te-				qallgute-	qxllgute-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaallnaak	r6k]y]6r	pants with embroidery on the bottom		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); this is a dual; the singular would be 
\f0\i0 qaallnaq*													pants with embroidery on the bottom				CK Rub 249		qallnak	qxllnxk	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1085 \u1100 \u257 \u1082 \
qaallngu	26k]3]e	deep drop-off of bottom near shore		iqallugteng qaallngumi aghqellaluku sighlatkumakanga \'91they got a lot of fish at the deep drop-off of the bottom near the shore by seine net\'92; kiiwek tesamkuk qaallngulguuk \'91the river on the southside has a deep drop-off on its shore\'92													deep drop-off of bottom near shore				CK A & W 79		qallngu	qxllngu	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \
qaalluugh-	26k]14-	go wake up friends early in the morning (of young boys) and tell them to come out wearing old women\'92s clothes		
\f2\i a teasing practice; 
\f0\i0 naangita teghtughtaqegkangit qaalluughnayukatki \'91their mothers would wake them up before their peers could come by and holler for them to wake up and come out in old women\'92s garb\'92													to go wake up friends early in the morning (of young boys) and tell them to come out wearing old women\'92s clothes				CK A & W 79		qallugh-	qxllxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1265 \u1271 -\
qaalqaqwa-	26km2f21f-	argue		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 quarrel												to argue; to quarrel	heuf/ncz. ccjhzncz			CK V & E 171		qalqaqwa-	qxlqaqwa-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1265 \u1072 -\
qaame-	26vs-	go out (fire, light, etc.)		qaamuq \'91it (fire, light, etc.) went out\'92 / qaamtaa \'91he put it out, extinguished it, turned it off\'92; qaamtigu \'91turn it off\'92; tanqiq qaamuq \'91there is an eclipse of the moon\'92; Maamleyaaghtaa siqineq 
\f2\i qaamaqngan
\f0\i0 . \'91It became somewhat dark while there was an 
\f2\i eclipse
\f0\i0  of the sun.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 134)	extinguished (be ~)	eclipsed (be ~)								visibility is limited by it being overcast			to go out (fire, light, etc.); to be extinguished; to be eclipsed; for visibility to be limited by it being overcast		PE qam0-				qame-	qxme-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1084 \u1099 -\
qaamkagh-	56vrf4-	extinguish suddenly		eslallugem kenghet qaamkaghtestii \'91the rain made the electricity go out\'92													to suddenly extinguish		< qaame-?-				qamkagh-	qxmkagh-	\uc0\u1203 \u257 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qaamkallagte-	26vrfk]f[ns-	stormy (be so ~ that nothing can be seen)		igleghat esla qaamkallagsan qerngughulluteng igleghusimalghiit \'91when the weather became really stormy, the travelers got together and traveled together\'92; qaamkallagulluku iflangwaaghamayalghii \'91he got caught in the snow storm, and he has gotten lost\'92													to be so stormy that nothing can be seen				CK A & W 79 CK		qamkallagte-	qxmkallagte-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaamkat	r6vrfn	large quantity, herd or flock		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); this is a plural	
\f0\i0 herd, large	flock, large								quantity, large			large quantity, herd, or flock				CK Rub 253		qamkat	qxmkat	\uc0\u1082 \u257 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \
qaamlighneq	26vkb4ys2	embryo developing in a bird egg		agum maniga qaamlighnengaqeftuq \'91the eggs are developing embryos out there (at the cliffs)\'92; manigyaghyughngaaghmeng qaamlighnengumanayukagu pimangisimalghiit \'91they would be getting some murre eggs, but they think the embryos are developing\'92	egg yolk	yolk of egg								inner part			embryo developing in a bird egg; egg yolk; inner part		< qaam(na)-lighneq		CK A & W 79		qamlighneq	qxmlighneq	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1084 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qaamllug-	26mk]eu-	dark (be very ~)		iitqaghsalghiiminguq mangteghaq qaamlluguftuq \'91when he went in, the house was really dark because there wasn\'92t any light on\'92; qaamllugmi aanluni naagsimalghii \'91he went out in the dark and tripped\'92													to be very dark (complete darkness)		< qaame-llug-		CK A & W 79		qamllug-	qxmllug-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1100 \u1083 \u1100 \u1091 \u1075 -\
qaamna	26vyf	inside one		
\f2\i base: 
\f0\i0 qam-
\f2\i ; obscured demonstrative pronoun; singular relative pronoun: 
\f0\i0 qamum \'91(of) the one inside\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 qaamkut \'91those inside\'92; 
\f2\i vocative:
\f0\i0  qaamyuq \'91you, inside\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: 
\f0\i0 tesqamna 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esqamna \'91that one inside\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  qamani \'91in there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  qamavek \'91to in there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 qamagun 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qaamggun \'91through in there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb:
\f0\i0  qamaken 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qaamken \'91from in there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional: 
\f0\i0 qama \'91there (in there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb:
\f0\i0  tesqamani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esqamani \'91there, in there\'92													that one inside		PE dem. qam-				qamna	qxmna	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \

\f1\b qaamqaghte-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 26v2f5ns-\super \'a1	\nosupersub pull on a loop or noose so as to tighten it		qaamqaghlluku quyngiq ataasiq nuqneghaataghaa \'91he lassoed one reindeer and held on to it\'92													to pull on a loop or noose so as to tighten it						qamqaghte-1	qxmqaghte-1	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1084 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub qaamqaghte-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 26v2f5ns-\super \'99	\nosupersub extinguish suddenly or immediately		keneq maateghhaq qaamqaghtuq \'91the light went out suddenly a while ago\'92	immediately turn off												to suddenly or immediately extinguish		< qaame-qaghte-				qamqaghte-2	qxmqaghte-2	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1084 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub qaamtaasiq	26vn6cb2	fire extinguisher		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qaamtaasik
\f2\i , for one extinguisher													
\f0\i0 fire extinguisher		< qaamte\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				qamtasiq	qxmtxsiq	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \

\f1\b qaamte-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 26vns-\'a1	extinguish		qaamtaa \'91he put it out\'92 / qaamtigu \'91turn it off\'92; pegnem qaamtaat mangtegham kumalghiim kengha \'91they put out the house fire with difficulty\'92	quench	put out (fire)								turn off			to extinguish; to quench; to put out (fire); to turn off		< qaame-te\super 1\nosupersub -				qamte-1	qxmte-1	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1084 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub qaamte-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 26vns-\'99	weather closes in		qaamteghllagyaqminigu esla repall aanviggangunani talwa manughaghhaghmun \'91the weather became so bad that it was hard to even go out in front of the house\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qaame-													for weather to close in						qamte-2	qxmte-2	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1084 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub qaanngwaaghek	26y3164sr	toboggan of baleen		
\f2\i usually used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qaanngwaaghek, 
\f2\i for one tobaggan; cf.
\f0\i0  qaanrak													toboggan of baleen						qanngwaghek	qxnngwxghek	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1085 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1099 \u1082 \
qaanqaghte-	26y2f5ns-	blow right toward and through the door		tiintangit qaanqaghlluki puqlaghhneghmeng aghtughtut \'91it [the wind] was going right through their tent\'92s door, and they had a hard time heating it up\'92													blow right toward and through the door				CK A & W 79		qanqaghte-	qxnqaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaanraq	26yhf2	sled, small, used in pairs for hauling boats		
\f2\i usually used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qaanrak, 
\f2\i for one such sled; cf. 
\f0\i0 qanragh-													small sled used in pairs for hauling boats		from Chukchi qanrak \'91?\'92				qanraq	qxnraq	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1085 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
Qaaramka	@6hfvrf	clan (a particular ~)		
\f2\i the plural is
\f0\i0  Qaaramket	Even (ethnic group)												a particular clan; Even (ethnic group)		from Chukchi qora&0 \'91reindeer\'92 and ramk0n \'91people\'92	09, 14			Qaramka	Qxramka	\uc0\u1178 \u257 \u1088 \u1072 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \
qaasghute-	26c5ens-	overshoot		neghsaq guusaghaa qaasghutaa \'91he aimed at the seal but overshot it\'92; angyat sukeram usingunateng qaasghutut \'91the boat, not carrying cargo, sped over the surface\'92	go above	travel on top of (it)											to overshoot; to go above; to travel on top of (it)		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -tghute-				qasghute-	qxsghute-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1089 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaasghuute-	26c58ns-	travel right on the surface of something		angyat sukeram usingunateng qaasghuutut \'91the boat was traveling fast without a load right on the surface (of the water)\'92; aghpumlami qaasghuutuq \'91he traveled right on the surface of the snow\'92													to travel right on the surface of something		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -?-		CK A & W 79		qasghute-	qxsghxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1089 \u1203 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaaske-	26crs-	covered on the outside by (it)		qaaskuq \'91it has a covering on its surface\'92; qaaskaa \'91it is covered with it\'92 / Tamaana melqwi qaaskelluki atkukaqaput. \'91We had our parks with their fur facing outward.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:70); \'85 teghikusaghllaget tugutelegllaget, mangunameng 
\f2\i qaaskelghiit
\f0\i0 . \'91\'85 large animals with large tusks, 
\f2\i covered on the outside
\f0\i0  with thick skin.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 44)													to be covered on the outside by (it)		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -ke-				qaske-	qxske-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1089 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qaaslighpak	26ckb5gfr	overcoat		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qaaslighpagek
\f2\i , for one overcoat													
\f0\i0 overcoat		< qaasliq-ghpak		CK Rub 259 CK		qaslighpak	qxslighpak	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
qaasliq	26ckb2	top one or top part		qaaslighpigaq \'91very top one or part; uppermost one\'92; ukut qaasliit maqaghsugnighllaguut \'91these people\'92s coats appear to be warm\'92	uppermost one	garment, outer, covering shoulders down to waist or below											top one or top part; uppermost one; outer garment covering shoulders down to waist or below	dth[ybq	PE qa9li3 or qalli3 (under PE qa90-); < qaya\super e\nosupersub -liq		CK V & E 114; Kallag. 104		qasliq	qxsliq	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
qaasni-	26cyb-	suffer a burning pain			burn in one's mind as from anger or grief	smart (sting)								sting			to suffer a burning pain; to burn in one's mind as from anger or grief; to smart; to sting		PE qac0li-				qasni-	qxsni-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1089 \u1085 \u1080 -\
qaasninaq	26cy]byf2	stinging or burning thing			grief												stinging or burning thing; grief		< qaasni-naq				qasninaq	qxsninaq	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
qaasqaq	26c2f2	highest level of beach			bank in front of village toward the sea												highest level of beach; bank in front of village toward the sea		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -qaq				qasqaq	qxsqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
Qaasqaq	@6c2f2	Gambell (west beach of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 west beach of Gambell		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -qaq				Qasqaq	Qxsqaq	\uc0\u1178 \u257 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
qaatke-	26nrs-	obey		qaatkaa \'91he obeyed him\'92 / Sigutenkuk Sugrugenkuk 
\f2\i qaatkaqegkangak
\f0\i0  naayek neqekaghqameng saghnaaqelghiik, taawanginaq Paapgaq pingigalnguq, ighsanitalghii. \'91Siguta and Sugruk 
\f2\i obeyed
\f0\i0  their mother and gathered things to eat, but Paapgaq didn\'92t; he was lazy.\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 1); Tawatengwaaq eslallugughtestaqaa 
\f2\i qaatkutkayugnunllu
\f0\i0  
\f2\i qaatkusigalngughnunllu
\f0\i0 . \'91He lets the rain fall on the 
\f2\i obedient
\f0\i0  and on the 
\f2\i disobedient
\f0\i0 .\'92 (Matthew 5.45)													to obey	ckeifncz			CK V & E 171 CK		qatke-	qxtke-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qaawna	261yf	inside one		
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  qaw-; 
\f2\i extended demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 qawum \'91(of) the one inside, northeast, toward or at Savoonga\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 qaawhkut \'91those inside, northeast, toward or at Savoonga\'92; 
\f2\i vocative:
\f0\i0  qaawyuq \'91you, inside; anaphoric\'92 
\f2\i abs. sing. pronoun: 
\f0\i0 tesqawna 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esqawna \'91that one inside\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  qawani \'91inside\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb: 
\f0\i0 qawavek \'91to inside\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb:
\f0\i0  qaawhun \'91through inside\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb: 
\f0\i0 qaawhken \'91from inside\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional: 
\f0\i0 qawa \'91there (in there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 tesqawani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esqawani \'91there, in there\'92	northeast (one toward the ~)	Savoonga (one toward or at)								end (one at the far ~)			that one inside; that one toward the northeast; that one toward or at Savoonga; that one at the far end		PE dem. qaw-				qawna	qxwna	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1265 \u1085 \u1072 \
qaayeri-	26qshb-	blocked by ice (get ~ in early winter with only a small breathing hole (of seals))		qaayeriniiqaat uglapestaaq neghsaq un\'92gavek atghaghvikiitkaq \'91they say there are a lot of seals that get closed in on the ice with only a little hole to breathe through\'92									VK has \'93qaayeri- \'91to be closed in by floating sea ice and forced to be on the ice (of seals)\'92\'94				to get blocked by ice in early winter with only a small breathing hole (of seals)		from Chukchi ?	x	example: from CK A & W 80		qayeri-	qxyeri-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1253 \u1099 \u1088 \u1080 -\
qaayghu	26q4e	bark or tree found washed up on beach		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qaya; Nunaaghmi 
\f2\i qaayghut
\f0\i0  egllumun kumaaqutkaqegkangit ama eslamillu. \'91The used 
\f2\i dried up tree bark
\f0\i0  to start fires for stoves in camps and outdoors.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 134)													tree bark found on beach		PE qa(C)03u(3)				qayghu	qxyghu	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u1091 \
qaayghwaaghlleq	26q4165k]s2	water that has flowed on top or ice or packed snow and then froze		qaayghwaaghlleghmeng meghtaamalghii \'91he got drinking water from the water that flowed over ice and snow and then froze\'92	aufeis												water that has flowed on top or ice or packed snow and then froze; aufeis		< qaya\super 0\nosupersub -(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-?-lleq		CK A & W 80		qayghwaghlleq	qxyghwxghlleq	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
qaazugh-	26p/4-	odd		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  qaazughnaghtuq \'91it makes one feel out of sorts\'92; qaazughyugtuq \'91he feels out of sorts\'92; 
\f2\i the sequence 
\f0\i0 zu
\f2\i  in this base is phonologically very unusual in Yupik	
\f0\i0 out of place or out of sorts	out of sorts											out of place or out of sorts; odd						qazugh-	qxzugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u257 \u1079 \u1102 \u1271 -\
qafsik	2facbr	wolverine		
\f2\i the wolverine is found in Chukotka but not on St. Lawrence Is.	Gulo luscus												
\f0\i0 wolverine (Gulo luscus)		PE qatvi! or qavci!				qafsik	qafsik	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \
qafsin'gu-	2facbyue-	how many (to be ~)		qafsin'gutsi? \'91how many of you are there?\'92; qafsinwaat? \'91how many are they?\'92													to be how many?		< qafsina-u-				qafsin'gu-	qafsin'gu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1075 \u1091 -\
qafsina	2facbyf	how many?		qafsinat piziki? \'91how many did you get?\'92; qafsinaneng ayveghaghtat? \'91how many walruses did they catch?\'92; 
\f2\i note the derived, or related forms,
\f0\i0  qafsinegyak/qafsinagyak, qafsinagneq, qafsin\'92gu-, qafsinkaghte-, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  qafsinkuuraq 
\f2\i &
\f0\i0  qafsinkuuragh-, 
\f2\i showing that the base of this word behaves as if it were 
\f0\i0 qafsineg- 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qafsinag- 
\f2\i at times													
\f0\i0 how many?		PE qavcit				qafsina	qafsina	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \
qafsinagneq	2facbyfuys2	several		may be used in either the plural, or the singular (but for a plurality): 
\f2\i Qafsinagneghet
\f0\i0  mangteghat tawansaghtut. '
\f2\i Several
\f0\i0  houses were there.' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:172); Iwernga taam sivungani 
\f2\i qafsinagneq
\f0\i0  tengegkayuk kaatkaaguq maavek salin nalugvigilluku, mekestaaghhaat tengegkayuget. 'Even before then 
\f2\i several
\f0\i0  planes arrived here, when there still was no landing field, small planes.' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:52)	few (a ~)												several; a few		< qafsina-neq\super ?				\nosupersub qafsinagneq	qafsinagneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \

\f1\b qafsinagyaga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2facbyfumzuf\super s	\nosupersub how many?		= qafsinegyaga; Elngaatall Uyiikinkut kinkut Komsomolnguftut atillghit, yuget 
\f2\i qafsinagyaget
\f0\i0 . \'91Uyiiki and company were called the Comsomol; they were 
\f2\i a number
\f0\i0  of people.\'92 (PANGEGH. 46)	number (a fair ~)								Rub. gives qafsinagyak				how many?; a fair(ly large) number (quantity)		< qafsina-yaga		VK		qafsinagyagae	qafsinagyagae	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1099 \
qafsinagyak	2facbyfumzr	how many?		= qavsinegyak, qafsinagyaga; qafsinegyak iqalluk tuguzigu? \'91how many fish did you take?\'92	number (a fair ~)												how many?; a fair(ly large) number (quantity)		< qafsina-yaga		VK		qafsinagyak	qafsinagyak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \

\f1\b qafsinegyaga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2facbysumzuf\super s	\nosupersub how many?		= qafsinagyaga, qafsinagyak; Ingleghi 
\f2\i qafsinegyagllaguftut
\f0\i0 , neghrugllaguftut. \'91It had a 
\f2\i fair number
\f0\i0  of beds; they constituted a large household.\'92 (QATEP. 9)	number (a fair ~)								Rub. gives qafsinagyak				how many?; a fair(ly large) number (quantity)		< qafsina-yaga		VK		qafsinegyagae	qafsinegyagae	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1099 \
qafsinegyak	2facbysumzr	how many?		= qavsinagyak, qafsinegyaga; qafsinegyak iqalluk tuguzigu? \'91how many fish did you take?\'92	number (a fair ~)												how many?; a fair(ly large) number (quantity)		< qafsina-yaga		VK		qafsinegyak	qafsinegyak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
qafsiniin	2facby7y	whcih in a series		qafsiniitangani Lluughvigem tagizin? \'91on what day of April did you come?\'92													which in a series		< qafsina-?				qafsinin	qafsinxn	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1251 \u1085 \
qafsinkaghte-	2facbyrf5ns-	get how many or how much		qafsinkaghta? how many did he catch?; qafsinkaghsigu? how much did you pay for it?, how much of it did you get?	catch how many or how much	pay how much											to get or catch how many or how much?; to pay how much?		< qafsina-kaghte-				qafsinkaghte-	qafsinkaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qafsinkuuragh-	2facbyrehf4-	few (be just a ~)		nulughyaghluni qafsinkuurameng kayusimaniiq \'91he went fishing and he only got a few fish\'92; angyaq qafsinkuuraq taan\'92ga aliitutuq \'91only a few boats are visible out there\'92													to be just a few		< qafsina-?-		CK A & W 80 CK 		qafsinkuragh-	qafsinkxragh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qafsinkuuraq	2facbyr8hf2	few (just a ~)		qafsinkuuraghhaat \'91a very few\'92													just a few		< qafsina-?		VK		qafsinkuraq	qafsinkxraq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1082 \u1263 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
qagallaag-	2fufk]6u-	waves (have ~ so large as to impede or prevent travel)															to have waves so large as to impede or prevent travel		< qaga(
\f2\i under
\f0\i0  qaagna)-llaag-		VK		qagallag-	qagallxg-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1075 -\
qagallaak	2fufk]6r	waves, large		qagallaagmi taaga ketiiqagut \'91they launched their boat in the (time of) large waves\'92; saamna qagallaaguuq salin angyamun \'91the west beach is still (too) full of large waves for boating\'92													large waves		< qaga(
\f2\i under
\f0\i0  qaagna)-llaak		CK A & W 80 CK 		qagallak	qagallxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1082 \
qagegh-	2fus4-	burst		qageghtuq \'91it burst\'92 / qageghtaa \'91he burst it\'92; siighnaq ghhuuqaa tuquuqam qageghtaa \'91the nail made the walrus stomach bag she had inflated burst\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qageq	pop open												to burst; to pop open						qagegh-	qagegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1271 -\
qageghqugh-	2fus52e4-	burst (many things)															to burst (many things)		< qagegh-qugh-		VK		qageghqugh-	qageghqugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qageghte-	2fus5ns-	frothy (be or become ~ (of ocean)		qageghtaa taan'ga meq \'91the sea out there has become rough with whitecaps\'92; anuqlinghani meq imaghllugughneghmini qageghtaqaa \'91when it becomes windy, when there are waves it becomes frothy\'92; telaanangat taaga qagheghtaq eslughvikaqaat \'91a sail boat is going into the wind to (check) the froth\'92													to be or become frothy (of ocean)		< qageq-te\super 2\nosupersub -		CK A & W 84		qageghte-	qageghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qageghyug-	2fus4m/u-	irritate the eyes		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check;the semantics don\'92t quite fit since qagegh-is \'91to burst\'92 [it is good]CK				to irritate the eyes	hfp]tlfnm ukfpf	< qagegh-yug-		Rub. 241 CK		qageghyug-	qageghyug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qageq	2fus2	wave, rough, on the sea		qaagghet \'91whitecaps\'92; qageghllaget \'91big ocean waves\'92; Qavaghtiqluteng meghmi taangani, 
\f2\i qageghllak
\f0\i0 . \'91They had spent several nights down there out at sea in 
\f2\i rough water
\f0\i0 .\'92 (PANGEGH. 48)	whitecap	sea swell								swell (sea ~)			rough wave on the sea; whitecap; sea swell		PE qa!0(3)				qageq	qageq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1179 \

\f1\b qagha\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2f4f\'a1	Eskimo dance where dancers dance sitting in pairs			dance, Eskimo, where dancers dance sitting in pairs												Eskimo dance where dancers dance sitting in pairs						qagha1	qagha1	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 1\

\f1\b qaghaaya, qaghaya, qagha\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2f46z. 2f4fz. 2f4f\super \'99	\nosupersub decoration on back of parka consisting of a dangling strip of fur often dyed reddish on the back															decoration on back of parka consisting of a dangling strip of fur often dyed reddish on the back		PY qa3a				qaghaya, qaghaya, qagha2	qaghxya, qaghaya, qagha2	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1103 , \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1103 , \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 2\
qaghertaq	2f4sinf2	strip of wood, thin and narrow, on the frame of a winter tent		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 thin narrow strip of wood on the frame of a winter tent				CK Rub 243		qaghertaq	qaghertaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1099 \u1096 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qaghi	2f4b	low deep voice		qaghituuq \'91he has a low voice\'92; qaghingituq \'91he does not have a deep voice\'92	deep low voice	voice, deep and low											low deep voice		cf. PE qa3ya-				qaghi	qaghi	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \
qaghiiq	2f472	plant that grow on tundra ponds and looks like grass or reeds		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined, or this may be a general term;  
\f0\i0 yugayaaghaq qaghiighem akulanganun iightuq \'91a young loon hid among the plants in the middle [of the lake]\'92; qaghiightuqaq naayvaq nunivagem qawaagan ighniviga \'91tundra birds lay eggs in lakes with plants in it\'92													plant that grow on tundra ponds and looks like grass or reeds				CK A & W 80		qaghiq	qaghxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1251 \u1179 \
qaghilugtaagh-	2f4bk/[n64-	hum at a low pitch															to hum at a low pitch		< qaghi-?-				qaghilugtagh-	qaghilugtxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
qaghleg-	2f4ksu-	rise in the air (of a plane, hair in wind, bird, balloon, tarpaulin blown partly off, etc.)		anuqem nuyaqa qaghlegtestaa \'91the wind is making my hair a mess\'92; safkaaghun qaghlekaghluku esghaqwaaghten sangwaa esgha miiksugtalghii taakwani qakma \'91please lift up the curtain and look around for whatever is making that strange noise out there\'92; tengegkayuget taaga qaghlegtut \'91the airplane is rising or taking off\'92													to rise in the air (of a plane, hair in wind, bird, balloon, tarpaulin blown partly off, etc.)		PE qa30-				qaghleg-	qaghleg-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
qaghlegute-	2f4ksuens-	mill about in excitement (of a group)		sangameng qaghlegutat? \'91why are they all running around?\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qaghleg-													to mill about in excitement (of a group)						qaghlegute-	qaghlegute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaghlu	2f4k/	harness		Unaami taghtughlutek aghnaghaam atami yaawaatikek tugumakek, ama quyngim 
\f2\i qaghlungi
\f0\i0  tugumakangi. \'91In the morning after they woke up, the girl took her father\'92s reindeer sled, and took the reindeer\'92s 
\f2\i harness
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 14)													harness		PE q03l03- (?)				qaghlu	qaghlu	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1083 \u1102 \
qaghlu-	2f4k/-	harness (put into ~)		qaghlii qikmit \'91he harnessed the dogs\'92; Kaalluni quyngimun qamughtek quyngik 
\f2\i qaghlumakek
\f0\i0 . \'91After she got to the reindeer she 
\f2\i harnessed
\f0\i0  the two draft reindeer.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 14)	harness-like (have ~ bands on it)												to harness; to have harness-like bands on it		PE q03l03- (?)				qaghlu-	qaghlu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1083 \u1102 -\
qaghluughi-	2f4k04b-	harness one\'92s dogs		unkuseniighyaghnaqa qaghluughiiq \'91the person who is going trapping is harnessing his team\'92; Tukughma waakenghisatgu, aghulaqnaqngayek nengiighhaak taakuk, 
\f2\i qaghluughisaghtughagka
\f0\i0 . \'91My host didn\'92t pay much atttention to the couple, so when they were about to leave I went out to help them 
\f2\i harness their dogs
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:192)													to harness one\'92s dogs		< qaghlu-?-				qaghlughi-	qaghlxghi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u1080 -\
qaghma	2f4vf	heat in air distorting vision			mirage												heat in air distorting vision; mirage		cf. PE qa3ma3 \'91temporary dwelling with sod walls\'92				qaghma	qaghma	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1072 \
qaghma-	2f4vf-	heat in air distorts vision		qaghmaqun taagna esghaqaghhu! \'91just take a look at that mirage!\'92; qaghmii naayghiit Quutmiit pangeghtelta \'91the Chukotkan mountains are visible in a mirage, let's go there (meaning that the visibility of the mountains in a mirage should be taken as an indication of good enough weather to make the trip feasible)\'92	appear in a mirage												for there to be heat in the air distorting vision; to appear in a mirage						qaghma-	qaghma-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1072 -\
qaghminaq	2f4vbyf2	chewing-gum made from cracklings (fat-residue)		qaghminameng kaamaquq \'91she\'92s chewing cracklings (fat-residue) gum\'92													chewing-gum made from cracklings (fat-residue)				CK A & W 81		qaghminaq	qaghminaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
qaghpa 	2f5gf	ornament, crown-like for hair, of reindeer hair or grass		Taagken sikughllugtuqameng avayameng 
\f2\i qaghpangllaghluku
\f0\i0  naasqwakun aatestekaat. \'91Then they made him put on his head a 
\f2\i headdress
\f0\i0  of thorny branches (\'93
\f2\i crown
\f0\i0  of thorns\'94).\'92 (Matthew 27.29)													crown-like hair ornament of reindeer hair or grass						qaghpa 	qaghpa 	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \
qaghpaghqugh-	2f5gf52e4-	sew up sides of parka		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; note qaghpa is \'91crown-like hair ornament of reindeer hair\'92				to sew up sides of parka	cibdfnm ,jrf re[kzyrb	< qaghpa-?- (?)		Rub. 262		qaghpaghqugh-	qaghpaghqugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qaghrilghaq	2f4hbk4f2	patch (grooved wooden disk used as a plug to ~ a hole in a sealskin used for a float, etc.)			plug (grooved wooden disk used as a ~ to patch a hole in a sealskin used for a float, etc.)												grooved wooden disk used as a plug to patch a hole in a sealskin used for a float, etc.						qaghrilghaq	qaghrilghaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qaghya-	2f4mz-	boast		qaghyaaq \'91he bragged\'92 / qaghyatkaa \'91he bragged about it\'92; qaghyatuneq seghleghuuq \'91boastfulness is offensive\'92; qaghyatkegpenaan \'91don't brag about it\'92	brag												to boast; to brag		PY-S qa3ya-				qaghya-	qaghya-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 -\
qagi	2fub	wave on shore		qagingilnguq \'91a place or time without big waves\'92; qagingiitaa \'91the surf is dying down\'92; qagingughsagutuq \'91it is now the time when the surf is often high\'92	breaker (wave)	surf											wave on shore; breaker; surf		PE qag0(3)				qagi	qagi	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \

\fs20 qagim tughumghalgutanga	2fubv ne4evufk4enf3f	
\fs24 octopus		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91the wave\'92s wrestling partner\'92													octopus		< qagi-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + tughumgha-lgun-
\f2\i possessed		
\f0\i0 SLI Cur. Man. 54	xxxt	qagim tughumghalgutanga	qagim tughumghalgutanga	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1084  \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1084 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \
qagin	2fuby	ice with wavy, rippled or washboard-like surface		
\f2\i also dual,
\f0\i0  qagitek, 
\f2\i for such ice; caused by freezing of slush ice under windy conditions, makes traveling with a sled difficult; see item 47 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004													ice with wavy, rippled or washboard-like surface		< qagi-(u)n				qagin	qagin	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \
qagingiik	2fub37r	harlequin duck			
\f2\i Histrionicus histrionicus								
\f0\i0 given as spectacled eider in SLI JR. DICT. p. 134; harlequin duck is uncommon in SLI area				harlequin duck
\f2\i  (Histrionicus histrionicus) 		
\f0\i0 PE qa!i&&i3				qagingik	qagingxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1187 \u1251 \u1082 \
qagingik	2fub3br	surf wave(s)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)													
\f0\i0 surf wave(s)	ghb,j7yfz djkyf			V & D 41; Rub 240		qagingik	qagingik	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1082 \
qagingughte-	2fub3e5ns-	come up (of surf)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to come up (of surf)	yfxbyfnmcz j ghb,jt.ecbkbdfnmcz - j ghb,jt	< qagi-(ng)ughte-		Rub. 241		qagingughte-	qagingughte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qagiraq	2fubhf2	wave(s), small		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 small wave(s)	kturjt djkytybt\\ yt,jkmij7 ghbmj7	< qagi-raq		CK V & E 41		qagiraq	qagiraq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
qagughiitaq	2fue47nf2	headband															headband		< qaguq-ghiitaq				qagughitaq	qagughxtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qagughruk	2fue4her	highest peak of ridge, mountains, etc.		naaygham qagughruganun mayughtut \'91they climbed to the highest peak of the mountain\'92; Kentuqam qagughrugan asinganeng uteghtuq qaygeghtegpenani \'91he went back from right under the top of Kentuqaq without getting to the top\'92													highest peak of ridge, mountains, etc.		< qaguq-ghruk		CK A & W 81		qagughruk	qagughruk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
Qagupalek	@fuegfksr	Gambell (third point on west coast south of ~)		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91one with a big (?) forehead\'92; 
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Kaghoopalik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.												third point on west coast south of Gambell; Kaghoopalik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		< qagu-?-lek				Qagupalek	Qagupalek	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
qaguq	2fue2	forehead			brow	upper area of mountain											forehead; brow; upper area of mountain		PE qa!u3				qaguq	qaguq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \
Qaguq	@fue2	Koozata River on St. Lawrence Is. (site at bend in lower part of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site at bend in lower part of Koozata River on St. Lawrence Is.						Qaguq	Qaguq	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \
qakegh-	2frs4-	taste bitter															to taste bitter		PE qak03-				qakegh-	qakegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 -\
qakemna	2frsvyf	out there (one ~)		
\f2\i base: 
\f0\i0 qakm-; 
\f2\i obscured demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 qakmum \'91(of) that one out there\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 qakemkut \'91those out there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative: 
\f0\i0 qakemyuq \'91you, out there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: 
\f0\i0 tesqakemna 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esqakemna \'91that one out there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 qakmani \'91out there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb: 
\f0\i0 qakmavek \'91to out there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 qakmagun \'91through out there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb:
\f0\i0  qakmaken \'91from out there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional: 
\f0\i0 qakma \'91there (out there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 tesqakmani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esqakmani \'91there, out there\'92													that one out there		PE dem. qakm-				qakemna	qakemna	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
qakeq	2frs2			qaakghaneng apalluqluku uutghutaqa neneghmeng \'91because of its bitter taste I changed my mind about eating it\'92													bitter taste		PE qak03-				qakeq	qakeq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \
qakeqaaq	2frs262	Parry's wallflower (edible root)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  pekeqaaq	wooly lousewort	
\f2\i Parrya nudicaulis								Pedicularis lanata			
\f0\i0 edible root of Parry's wallflower 
\f2\i (Parrya nudicaulis)
\f0\i0 ; wooly lousewort 
\f2\i (Pedicularis lanata)				
\f0\i0 2nd gloss from Aynganga\'92s \'93Beringia\'94 article		qakeqaq	qakeqxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \u257 \u1179 \
qakiima	2fr7vf	oh no, not again!		= qakima; 
\f2\i particle; said in disgust or dismay when something occurs too much or too often; used with a verb in the optative mood; 
\f0\i0 qakiima anuqlighli  \'91oh no, it\'92s windy again!\'92													oh no, not again!		from Chukchi ?	x			qakima	qakxma	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1251 \u1084 \u1072 \
qakiimallu	2fr7vfk]/	oh no, not again!		= qakima, qakimallu; 
\f2\i particle; said in disgust or dismay when something occurs too much or too often; used with a verb in the optative mood													
\f0\i0 oh no, not again!		< qakiima-llu	x			qakimallu	qakxmallu	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1251 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
qakima	2frbvf	oh no, not again		= qakiima; 
\f2\i particle; said in disgust or dismay when something occurs too much or too often; used with a verb in the optative mood; 													
\f0\i0 oh no, not again		from Chukchi ?	x			qakima	qakima	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \
qakimallu	2frbvfk]/	oh no, not again		= qakiimallu; 
\f2\i particle; said in disgust or dismay when something occurs too much or too often; used with a verb in the optative mood; 
\f0\i0 Allamengllu amyughwaaghnaanghitaghput. 
\f2\i Qakimallu
\f0\i0  suflugalwaaqli! \'91We better not tease him ever again. 
\f2\i Oh no (just think of how bad the situation would become)
\f0\i0  letting him (in our imagination) have a gun!\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 32)													oh no, not again		< qikima-llu	x			qakimallu	qakimallu	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
qakiqnaq	2frb2y]f2	hunter, avid											check				avid hunter	pfzlksq j[jnybr			Rub. 246		qakiqnaq	qakiqnaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \
qakiqniqe-	2frb2y]b2s-	plan and prepare go somewhere or do something		angyaghuunnaluteng tesqaga qakiqniqutaqut \'91they are planning on going boating out there\'92; tevraghnaluni qakiqniqaqeftuq \'91he is planning on going seal hunting\'92; Taagken allgeghusama estugaghmeng 
\f2\i qakiqniqunga
\f0\i0  tesamavek 1972mi. \'91Then, when I got it [the gear] from the store, I 
\f2\i prepared to go
\f0\i0  to Southwest Cape in 1972.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:32)													to plan and prepare to go somewhere or do something		< qakiqnaq-iqe-		CK A & W 81 CK, VK 		qakiqniqe-	qakiqniqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qakite-	2frbns-	aftertaste (have an ~ from eating something bitter)		qakituq \'91he has an aftertase from eating something bitter \'91/ qakitutkaa \'91he has the aftertaste of its bitterness\'92 /													to have an aftertaste from eating something bitter		< qakeq-?-				qakite-	qakite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qakun	2frey	when (in the future)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 qakun aanaqsin? \'91when are you going out?\'92													when (in the future)	rjulf (e ,eleotv)	PE qaku		CK V & E 125 (Russ vocab)		qakun	qakun	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
qakuqwaaqu(n)	2fre2162e\'f8e\uc0\u960 	later (sometime ~)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 sometime later	d ,eleotv. gjnjv. gjp;t	< qakun-?		CK V & E 125 (russ vocab)	xxxn	qakuqwaqu(n)	qakuqwxqu(n)	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 (\u1091 )\
qakwhegte-	2fr1]s[ns-	plan for a trip		qakwhegtaqukut nulughyaghnaluta \'91we are making plans for going fishing\'92; qimugsighnaqet qakwhegtekat ima unaaq \'91those people who are going out on dogsleds have been getting ready all morning\'92	prepare for a trip												to plan and/or prepare for a trip						qakwhegte-	qakwhegte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1265 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qala	2fkz	fur seal		
\f2\i this animal is only rarely found in the Yupik area	
\f0\i0 seal (fur ~)	
\f2\i Callorhinus urinus											
\f0\i0 fur seal (Callorhinus urinus)						qala	qala	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
qalepangi-	2fksgf3b-	outspoken (be ~)		qalepangitutanganeng naafqiinayukan 
\f2\i council
\f0\i0 -enun agghilghiinun pisimangisimakangat \'91because of his being so talkative they did not let him attend the council meeting for fear that he would interfere with it\'92; qalepangilleghput pellaghuutuq \'91our talkative one left a feeling of emptiness by his absence\'92; Legan aghnaghhaq 
\f2\i qalepangighllak
\f0\i0  ilagavaghqughllak. \'91Well, the little woman was very 
\f2\i talkative
\f0\i0  and sang loudly.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:46)	talkative (be ~)												to be outspoken; to be talkative						qalepangi-	qalepangi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 -\
qalepangilnguq*	2fksgf3bk3e2	straight-forward person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check for qalepangite-				straight-forward person	ghzvjq \'f8j [fhfrntht\uc0\u960 	< qalepangi-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -nguq		Rub. 249		qalepangilnguq*	qalepangilnguq*	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
qalepgute-	2fksg[ens-	ride low in the water (of a boat)		usipagllagluteng angyat igleghsalghiimeng qalepgutut \'91the boat had too much of a load and when they left and rode very low\'92; qalepgusalghiimeng sukamsugiighutii \'91when they were riding very low in the water, they were really slow\'92													to ride low in the water (of a boat)				CK A & W 81		qalepgute-	qalepgute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1087 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qalghigh-	2fk4b4-	sounds (make non-speech vocal ~)			whine (of dog)	cry (of animal) or sing (of bird)								bark (of seal)			to make non-speech vocal sounds; to whine (of a dog); to cry (of an animal); to bark (of a seal); to sing (of a bird)		PE qal03-				qalghigh-	qalghigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qalghighta	2fk4b5nf	male reindeer			reindeer, male												male reindeer		< qalghigh-(s)ta		CK E & V 52; B Slwooko		qalghighta	qalghighta	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
qalghighvik	2fk4b4dbr	heat (time or month of ~ of animals)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 time or month of heat of animals; month of the heat of animals		< qalghigh-vik		CK Rub 247		qalghighvik	qalghighvik	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
qalghiregte-	2fk4bhs[ns-	whine															to whine		< qalghigh-?-		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 157		qalghiregte-	qalghiregte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1080 \u1088 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaligh-	2fkb4-	put on gut rain parka															to put on a gut rain parka						qaligh-	qaligh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qalighak	2fkb4fr	outermost layer		tengugem qaayngi qalighalget makregtekaaluteng ugmelengestaghaat \'91when they the outermost layer of liver is peeled off, it is really thin\'92; aghveghem tengugan qalighagi saguyamun  siikniiqiit \'91the outer part of the whale\'92s liver is said to be used as drumskin\'92													outermost layer		< qaliq-?		CK A & W 81		qalighak	qalighak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1082 \
qalighaq*	2fkb4f2	eardrum		
\f2\i dual,
\f0\i0  qalighaak, 
\f2\i used for one eardrum													
\f0\i0 eardrum		< qaliq-ghaq				qalighaq*	qalighaq*	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qalingllaasiq	2fkb3k]6cb2	needle, special, used to sew gut raincoats 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 special needle used to sew gut raincoats 		< qaligh-ngllagh-(u)siq		CK Rub 248		qalingllasiq	qalingllxsiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qalipak	2fkbgfr	raincoat, gut, old		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qalipagek,
\f2\i  for one such raincoat													
\f0\i0 old gut raincoat				CK Rub 248		qalipak	qalipak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
qaliq	2fkb2	gut raincoat		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qalik, 
\f2\i for one such raincoat	
\f0\i0 raincoat, gut												gut raincoat		PE qali3- (under PE qa90)				qaliq	qaliq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
qaliqenghaaq	2fkb2sy462	gut (dried ~ as used for making rain parka)			plastic, tranparent												dried gut as used for making rain parka; transparent plastic		< qaliq-?-				qaliqenghaq	qaliqenghxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \
qaliraaq	2fkbh62	raincoat (modern)		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qaliraaghek
\f2\i , for one such raincoat													
\f0\i0 raincoat (modern)		< qaliq-raaq				qaliraq	qalirxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
qalla	2fk]z	sound of bubbling or boiling water		qallat \'91the trail of a sea mammal that makes the water churn\'92	boiling water sound	bubbling water sound											sound of bubbling or boiling water		PE qa@a-\super 1				\nosupersub qalla	qalla	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
qallaataq	2fk]6nf2	food that is (to be) boiled a long time		unkuvaget qallaataaniiqiit inqun qallaalluteng pikayugwet \'91they say yearling walruses are to be boiled a long time to eat, so they boil them\'92; qallaataghtuunnaqukut \'91we are going eat long boiled food\'92													food that is (to be) boiled a long time		< qallaate-aq		CK A & W 81 CK 		qallataq	qallxtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qallaqugh-	@fk]z2e2	bubble		Qavaghyan aghsukestaghluku nunakun llikestaghluku ugkenga taana 
\f2\i qallaqughllak
\f0\i0  tuguluku sigutangakun aghnam kuuvumakanga legan tuqulluku. \'91After the [other woman] had fallen asleep, she lifted her up gently and laid her on the ground, and then she picked up the pot of 
\f2\i boiling
\f0\i0  broth and poured it in her ear, killing her.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:266)	churn	boil											to bubble, boil, and churn		< qalla-?-				qallaqugh-	qallaqugh-	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
qallaragh-	rfk]zhf4-	gurgle		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to gurgle		< qalla-ragh-		CK Rub 251		qallaragh-	qallaragh-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qallate-, qallaate-	2fk]zns-. 2fk]9ns-	boil		qallatuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qallaatuq \'91it boiled\'92; qallataa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qallaataa \'91he boiled\'92 /	cook by boiling or by simmering for long time												to boil; to cook by boiling or by simmering for long time		< qalla-?-				qallate-, qallate-	qallate-, qallxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1090 \u1099 -, \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qalleg-	2fk]su-	speak		qallegtughnguq whaten . . . \'91he said this . . .\'92; qallegnanightuq ilagaghngaaghmi \'91he fell silent in the middle of his singing\'92; qallegnanighluni nagataa atani \'91he quieted down and listened to his father\'92	sutter something	talking								say something of importance			to speak; to utter something; to talk; to say something of importance		PE qa@a-\super 2				\nosupersub qalleg-	qalleg-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 -\
qallegnanighqe-	2fk]suyfyb52s-	quiet (him) down			speechless (leave (him) ~ by one\'92s words or actions												to quiet (him) down; to leave (him) speechless by one's words or actions		< qalleg-nanigh-?-				qallegnanighqe-	qallegnanighqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qallegsaghagh-	2fk]s[cz4f4-	pressure (him) to speak		qallegsaghaghluku wetku ungipamsugtestaghput ayumiim kiyaghtaallghaneng \'91only when we pressured him did he tell us about the old ways of life\'92; qallegsaghaanneghmeng apamegnun anengani temngi aghyuughtesteghllagaa \'91she maneuvered their grandfather into scolding her brother\'92	get (him) to say what one wants to hear												to pressure (him) to speak; to get (him) to say what one wants to hear		< qalleg-saghagh-				qallegsaghagh-	qallegsaghagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qallegyugneq	2fk]su/uys2	outspoken sperson			derisive (person who makes ~ remark)												outspoken person; person who makes derisive remarks		< qalleg-yug-neq\super 2				\nosupersub qallegyugneq	qallegyugneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qallemsuggaq	2fk]svc/[f2	quietness			silence	tranquility											quietness; silence; tranquility	nb[j	< qalleg-msuggaq		Rub. 251; VK 		qallemsuggaq	qallemsuggaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
qallevak	2fk]sdfr	coverall-like reindeer or other skin suit for baby or woman		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qallevagek, 
\f2\i for one such pair of coveralls													
\f0\i0 coverall-like suit; baby's coverall with hood and with a flap for inserting a diaper; woman's hoodless reindeer skin knee-length suit with fur trim at neck and ends of sleeves and with drawstrings at the knees		PY-S qa@0vak				qallevak	qallevak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
qallukaq	2fk]/rf2	skin with hair from reindeer leg			legging made out of skin with hair from reindeer leg												skin with hair from reindeer leg; legging made out of skin with hair from reindeer leg						qallukaq	qallukaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
qalluki-	2fk]/rb-	process reindeer leg skin with hair		aghnam qallukii quyngim ighungi kepluki emta eggnayukatki \'91the woman cut off the legs of the reindeer skin before they could discard them\'92													to process reindeer leg skin with hair		< qallukaq-li-				qalluki-	qalluki-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \u1080 -\
qalmaawi-	2fkv61b-	unsuccessful at hunting (be ~)		qalmaawiluni tagimalghii unangneghmeng aghtughluni \'91he came home when he couldn\'92t catch any seal\'92	unlucky at hunting (be ~)	accomplish (not ~ one\'92s goal)											to be unsuccessful or unlucky at hunting; to not accomplish one\'92s goal		from Chukchi qelm0t0k \'91be unlucky at hunting\'92	14	deR. 353; VK		qalmawi-	qalmxwi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1084 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\
qalmagh-	2fkvf4-	summon dogs by making vocal sounds															to summon dogs by making vocal sounds		PE qalma3-				qalmagh-	qalmagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qalmesam qawaaga	2fkvsczv 2f16uf	
\f2\i Heteroscelus incanus 			
\f0\i0 wandering tattler	tattler, wandering											wandering tattler 
\f2\i (Heteroscelus incanus)		
\f0\i0 < qalmesaq + qawaak				qalmesam qawaga	qalmesam qawxga	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1084  \u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 \u1072 \
qalmesaq	2fkvscz2	reef		qalmesat awavaqun aagteki \'91go around away from the rocks\'92; qalmesaq talughngalghii tenpemaat \'91they ran into the reef that lies right under the surface\'92	rock(s) right under or at surface of water												reef; rock(s) right under or at surface of water		PY qalmi(t)yaq				qalmesaq	qalmesaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
qalmesite-	2fkvscbns-	run aground on rocks or reef		qakiimallu qalmesitaqitek aghqitaghami \'91how lucky, you might have run into the rocks in the shallows\'92	aground (run ~ on rocks or reef)												to run aground on rocks or reef		< qalmesaq-?-				qalmesite-	qalmesite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qalpallagh-	2fk]gfk]z4-	respond		pegnem qalpallaghtestaa tuqlughrapagluku \'91he finally got him to respond after repeatedly calling him\'92; tuqlughngaamkun tusaqenghitem qalpallanghisimalghii \'91even though I kept calling him, on account of not hearing he did not respond at all\'92	make a move												to respond; to make a move				VK		qalpallagh-	qalpallagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
qalqalima	2fk]2fkbvf	axe		Taawa quuguluni 
\f2\i qalqalimaqulleghtuftuq
\f0\i0 . \'91It showed signs of being chopped with an 
\f2\i axe
\f0\i0  for firewood.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)													axe	njgjh	from Chukchi !atte, pl. !at!at \'91adze\'92, with suffix ?				qalqalima	qalqalima	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \
qalqalima-	2fk]2fkbvf-	chop with an axe		qalqalimaaq \'91he chopped with an axe\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he hit himself (accidently) with an axe\'92; qalqalimaa \'91he chopped with an axe on it, he hit it with the axe\'92 / yugem qalqalimaak nasqunghek \'91the man used an axe on the walrus skull\'92													chop with an axe						qalqalima-	qalqalima-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 -\
qalqasiq	2fk]2fcb2	navel			belly button												navel; belly button		PE qa@aci3				qalqasiq	qalqasiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qalqumigh-	2fk]2evb4-	turn and come toward one (of an animal)		telanangamaluki maklagem qimagraghtaamaghmi qalqumiimakangi \'91while they were sailing, a bearded seal was going away from the boat and then turned and came back\'92; kateqneghet qalqumilghiit guuqaamakangit \'91they shot at the herd of walruses in the water that had turned around and come back toward them\'92													to turn and come toward one (of an animal)				CK A & W 82		qalqumigh-	qalqumigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qalta	2fk]nf	fish scale		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qerta	scale of fish	scab								barnacle			fish scale; scab; barnacle		PY-S qalt0				qalta	qalta	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \
qaltaaghwaq*	2fk]n641f2	bucket taken when hunting by boat and kept near captain		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qaltaghwaaq 
\f2\i (which the present form might be a variant of)													
\f0\i0 bucket taken when hunting by boat and kept near captain		< qaltaq-?		VK		qaltaghwaq*	qaltxghwaq*	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
qaltaawrak	2fk]n61hfr	bucket (small or makeshift)															small or makeshift bucket		<  qaltaq-?		VK		qaltawrak	qaltxwrak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u257 \u1265 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
qaltaghwaaq	2fk]nf4162	pail (toy ~)		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qaltaghwaaghek,
\f2\i  for one such pail; the wife of a successful whaling captain would take it down to greet her husband and use it to convey and store small choice pieces of the whale meat which were later used in a ritual celebrating the whaling	
\f0\i0 pail, special, used in a whale ceremony												toy pail; special pail used in a whale ceremony		< qaltaq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				qaltaghwaq	qaltaghwxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qaltaq	2fk]nf2	pail		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qaltak,
\f2\i  for one pail	
\f0\i0 bucket												pail; bucket		PE qalta3				qaltaq	qaltaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qalu	2fk/	dipnet															dipnet		PE qalu(-)				qalu	qalu	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \
qalu-	2fk/-	dip		qaluuq \'91he bailed water out of the boat\'92; qalaa \'91he bailed it (either container or liquid)\'92 / qalutuq meghmeng \'91he ladled out some water\'92; qalugu mesiigha neqem qayaaneng \'91skim off the oil from the surface of the broth\'92	ladle	bail out a boat								scoop			to dip; to ladle; to scoop; to bail (a boat); to use a dipnet		PE qalu(-)				qalu-	qalu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 -\
qalugyaq	2fk/umz2	lance, long-handled, used for killing whales (and other sea mammals) 															long-handled lance used for killing whales (and other sea mammals)		PE qalu!ya3				qalugyaq	qalugyaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
qalungtaaraq	2fk/3n6hf2	dipnet, long-handled and made from baleen, for getting seafood		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 qalungtaarak,
\f2\i  for one such dipnet													
\f0\i0 long-handled dipnet made from baleen for getting seafood		< qalu-?-		baleen part from CK A & W 82; VK		qalungtaraq	qalungtxraq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1090 \u257 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
qalusiqaq	2fkecb2f2	pail used to bail out water from a boat		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 qalusiqak,
\f2\i  for one such pail;
\f0\i0  qalusiqagneng angyam megha qaluteggu \'91someone bail out the water from the boat using the bailer\'92; meghutlugek qalusiqaqlukek qalugu angyam megha \'91bail out the water of the boat using the can as a bailer\'92	bailer for a boat												pail used to bail out water from a boat		< qalu-?		CK A & W 		qalusiqaq	qalusiqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
qalusta	2fk/cnf	bailer (the person in a skin boat whose job it is to bail out the boat (and mix the gas))															bailer; person in a skin boat whose job it is to bail out the boat (and mix the gas)		< qalu-(s)ta				qalusta	qalusta	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
qalutaq	2fk/nf2	ladle															ladle		< qalu-(u)taq		VK		qalutaq	qalutaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qaluuku	2fk0re	harpoon line		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 a certain line for a harpoon						qaluku	qalxku	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1082 \u1091 \
Qaluvik	@fk/dbr	January		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time for dipnetting\'92; 
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  
\f2\i given in various sources as
\f0\i0  November, December, December-January, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  February-March													January		< qalu-vik				Qaluvik	Qaluvik	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
qamaggute-	2fvf[ens-	do their parts, everyone of them		qamaggutut \'91they all did their parts, got their shares, had their turns, etc.\'92	get their shares, everyone of them	have their turns, everyone of them											to do their parts, get their shares, have their turns, everyone of them		< qamagte-(u)te-				qamaggute-	qamaggute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qamagte-	2fvf[ns-	go through all		qamagtuq \'91it is finished; qamagtaa he finished it\'92 / qamagtaa neqani \'91he finished his food\'92; qamagtaa akuzitkegkani \'91he saig all he had to say\'92; qamagtaa mangteghaq qaagna tunquneghmeng ungipam igaaneng \'91he passed newspapers out to the whole village\'92; qamagtuq \'91the end\'92 
\f2\i (said at the end of a story); this base is often used in the subordinative: 
\f0\i0 qamagllukek atughaak mesiighek \'91he used up all the fuel oil\'92; neghanka qamaggluki \'91I ate them all\'92; qemaggluteng aghulaqut \'91they all left\'92; angyat qamaglluteng taglaghtuutut \'91all the boats came in\'92; atghaaqaq Ungazimeng qamaglluni iteghaata(a)? did all those who came from Chaplino come in?; Iiwleng mamlegmi kiyaghutkelluku 
\f2\i qamaglluteng
\f0\i0  teghigat ama qawaaget ellmeggnun neqmeng ivaghiiqut  uflughluku. \'91On account of always living in the dark 
\f2\i all
\f0\i0  the animals and the birds sought food for themselves by feeling for it.\'92 (YUPIGET UNGIP. 27)	consume or be consumed entirely	come to the end								all			to go through all; to consume or be consumed entirely; to come to the end; to completely use up; to finish	rjyxfncz	possibly from Chukchi qemeyw0- \'91do something together\'92		example with Ungaziq is from Linda Badten		qamagte-	qamagte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qamagunginaq	2fvfue3byf2	inwardly		
\f2\i particle
\f0\i0  ; qamagunginaq whangallu yakughyukaqa angyakun pilleghqaq anuqataaghaghmi \'91I too have been having misgivings about going in a boat while it's still a little too windy\'92; atightughtuq qamagunginaq \'91he is reading silently\'92; qamagunginaq aagtuq \'91he's putting up with things without complaint\'92; 
\f2\i Qamagunginaq
\f0\i0  ugumiyugumaghmi, qayughllak nenglaqegkaqegkanga. \'91
\f2\i Inwardly
\f0\i0  he became angry because he (the other) had laughed at him.\'92 (YUPIGET UNGIP. 62)	in one\'92s mind	without expressing it								oneself (to oneself)			in one's mind; inwardly; without expressing it; to oneself		< qama(under qaamna)-?-(ng)inaq				qamagunginaq	qamagunginaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
qamanlliiq	2fvfyk]72	whale-gun shell that explodes inside a whale		aghveqluku qamanlliiqulluni guutuq \'91they struck the whale and the shell also exploded\'92; qamanlliigha mulaaghlluni guusimalghii \'91its shell took a while to explode\'92													whale-gun shell that explodes inside a whale				CK A & W 83		qamanlliq	qamanllxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1179 \
qamanlliqe-	2fvfyk]b2s-	keeping something to oneself without talking about it		qamanlliqaa \'91he kept it to himself, didn\'92t talk about it with others\'92 / apeghpenaan qamanlliqumaagu liisimakeghngaaghmigu \'91he didn\'92t talk about it but kept it to himself\'92; qamanlliqegpenaki iilqegllghet, qinuyugutnguut \'91don\'92t keep concerns to yourself, they make you sick\'92; liilightughlleq qamanlliqluku tawaten pimangisimalghiit \'91they didn\'92t keep the law in their minds without talking about it\'92													to keep something to oneself without talking about it		< qama(ni)-nte-lliqe-		CK A & W 83		qamanlliqe-	qamanlliqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qamarila	2fvfhbkz	relgious ceremony		
\f2\i the winners of the competitions would receive prizes from the ceremony sponsor									
\f0\i0 check; we have this as qamilira ((Where??))				a certain old-time religious ceremony accompanied by competions	yfpdfybt htkbubjpyjuj ghfplybrf. cjghjdj;lf/otujcz cjcnzpfybzvb			Rub. 252; CK		qamarila	qamarila	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1088 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \
qame-	2fvs-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > qameqetaq, qamigagh-, qamiigh-, qamilgugh-, qamite-, qamiya, qamuq																			qame-	qame-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 -\
qameqetaq	2fvs2snf2	bone or the like dragged on the ground for puppies to chase															a bone or the like dragged on the ground for puppies to chase		< qame-?-				qameqetaq	qameqetaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qamestaq	2fvscnf2	fat, fibrous, under dark skin of whale fin															fibrous fat under dark skin of whale fin						qamestaq	qamestaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qamigagh-	2fvbuf4-	drag over the ground, floor or ice		angyaghteng sikugni qamigaataat qaanratgun qaakluku \'91they dragged their sled on the ice after putting up on a set of little sled\'92; mekelghiiq qamigameng igleghtaquq nem ilungani \'91the boy dragged himself around inside the house\'92													to drag over the ground, floor or ice		PE qami!a3- (under PE qamu3-); < qame-?-				qamigagh-	qamigagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qamiigh-	2fv74-	ready (make ~ a load of meat to pull on ice)		ayveghaghluteng qaanngwaateng qamiightughluki igleghtut qamigameng \'91they caught a walrus and loaded it up on the toboggan and pulled it\'92; unangluni qamiighluku igleghtuq \'91he caught a seal and loaded it up and left\'92													to make ready a load of meat to pull on ice		< qame-?		CK A &  W 83		qamigh-	qamxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1251 \u1271 -\
qamilgugh-	2fvbkue4-	travel together by sled		qamiyegput taghnughhitengllaghlukek qamilgughtukut \'91we made a shelter for the children on our sled and we traveled as a family\'92													to travel together by sled						qamilgugh-	qamilgugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qamilgut	2fvbkuen	travelers (going together by sled)		
\f2\i this is a plural; the singular would be 
\f0\i0 qamilguq													travelers (going together by sled)						qamilgut	qamilgut	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \
qamiskaq	2fvbcrf2	wood for building a sled															wood for building a sled		< qamiya-kaq		VK		qamiskaq	qamiskaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1089 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
qamisli-	2fvbck]b-	make a sled or sleds			sled (make a ~)												to make a sled or sleds		< qamiya-li-				qamisli-	qamisli-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
qamisluk	2fvbck]/r	sled (large makeshift ~ pulled by a tractor or bulldozer)		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qamisluuk
\f2\i , for one such sled													
\f0\i0 large makeshift sled pulled by a tractor or bulldozer		< qamiya-lluk				qamisluk	qamisluk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
qamite-	2fvbns-	give something to take with one (especially a portion of meat from the site where the animal was killed)															to give something to take with one (especially a portion of meat from the site where the animal was killed)		PY qamit0- (under PE qamu3-); < qame-?-				qamite-	qamite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b qamiya\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2fvbz\super s	\nosupersub sled		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qamiyek, 
\f2\i for one sled; 
\f0\i0 qamiyegken \'91your sled\'92; qamiskun 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qamiyegnegun \'91by sled\'92													sled		< qame-?-				qamiyae	qamiyae	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1103 \u1099 \
qamiyngwaaq	2fvbq3162	sled, toy or small		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qamiyngwaaghek
\f2\i , for one such sled													
\f0\i0 toy or small sled		< qamiya\super e\nosupersub -(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				qamiyngwaq	qamiyngwxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \u1253 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b qamsuugte-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2fvc0[ns-\super \'a1	\nosupersub weather becomes poor with respect to visibility															for the weather to become poor with respect to visibility						qamsugte-1	qamsxgte-1	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub qamsuugte-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2fvc0[ns-\super \'99	\nosupersub blink															to blink				CK gloss Rub 254		qamsugte-2	qamsxgte-2	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub qamsuuk	2fvc0r	closed in weather with poor visibility		Tengegkayuget 
\f2\i qamsuugem
\f0\i0  nalunghitut. \'91The airplane did not land on account of 
\f2\i poor visibility
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 136); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qaamte\super 2\nosupersub -	weather, closed in with poor visibility												closed in weather with poor visibility						qamsuk	qamsxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1082 \
qamugh-	2fve4-	pull		qamughaa \'91he pulled it\'92 / qamiyegnekun ilangquq qamughaa \'91he pulled the ice on the sled\'92; neqa anigukun qamumeng taglaasimakanga \'91he brought the meat up by dragging it over the snow\'92; angyat ilateng taglamun qamuumakangit ivenruutegket naavyayek \'91coming back up the one boat pulled the other boat when its motor broke\'92	drag	tow											to pull; to drag; to tow		PE qamu3-				qamugh-	qamugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qamughagh-	2fve4f4-	pull or drag by muscle power only															to pull or drag by muscle power only		< qamugh-?-				qamughagh-	qamughagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qamughaghtagh-	2fve4f5nf4-	jerk one\'92s head away in a gesture of anger (done by girls)															to jerk one\'92s head away in a gesture of anger (done by girls)		< qamugh-aghtagh-		VK		qamughaghtagh-	qamughaghtagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qamughaq	2fve4f2	toboggan, store-bought															store-bought toboggan		< qamuq-ghaq				qamughaq	qamughaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qamughqe-	2fve52s-	compel to pull		llaaghanwha qamughqaanga neqeghllagmeng neqangisagumaluta \'91luckily he made it possible for me to have something to haul home in this time of need\'92; umyugiitutmineng qikmini qamughqepagllagem qimugsiiluni itegiit kiliqusteghllagumakangi \'91he is so mean and negligent that he caused his dogs to have sore feet with cuts by forcing them to pull so much\'92	give someone enough of one's catch so that he must pull it home												to compel to pull; to give someone enough of one's catch so that he must pull it home		< qamugh-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				qamughqe-	qamughqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qamughsiigh-	2fve5c74	pull for some distance		unaghsiq esnemeng quugkaaluku kelutmun qamughsiighluku kepughaa \'91he pulled a drift wood log from the coast to up inland and he cut it up as firewood\'92; qamughsiighumaluku kaalluku ilangita kayusiimaat \'91they got to him as he was pulling and helped him\'92													to pull for some distance				CK A & W 83		qamughsigh-	qamughsxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 \
qamughta	2fve5nf	animal (dog, reindeer, etc.) used for pulling a sled or the like		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  qikmik taakuk qamughtenguftuk; iknaqepigtuk \'91the two dogs are used for pulling; they are very strong\'92	draught animal								check whether used on SLI				animal (dog, reindeer, etc.) used for pulling a sled or the like; draught animal	jktym-nz;tkjdjp	; < qamugh-(s)ta		Rub. 255		qamughta	qamughta	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
qamughtaq	2fve5nf2	tugboat			tractor												tugboat; tractor		< qamugh-?-				qamughtaq	qamughtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qamughtuq	2fve5ne2	tugboat		CAA-t sivuliq mangteghaghqaat 
\f2\i qamughtughhaam
\f0\i0 , aatgha Bozo, tagitkaqaa maavek barge-ekun. \'91At first a little 
\f2\i tugboat
\f0\i0 , named Bozo, brought the CAA house material here by barge.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:54)													tugboat				VK		qamughtuq	qamughtuq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \
qamuq	2fve2	pulled or dragged thing (especially a load of meat)		qamuq taakwna yugem taglaaskanga eslegepigta sangawatuq \'91the load hauled by the man looks so big that I really wonder what it is\'92													pulled or dragged thing (especially a load of meat)		<  PE qamu3-				qamuq	qamuq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1179 \
qamuun, qamuutaq	2fv8y. 2fv8nf2	sled, small, with runners traditionally of ivory or bone used to pull a skin boat across the ice		
\f2\i often used in dual
\f0\i0 , qamuutek 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qamuutak, 
\f2\i for one small sled	
\f0\i0 winch	tobaggan								pull rope or other pulling device			winch; pull rope or other pulling device; small sled with runners traditionally of ivory or bone used to pull a skin boat across the ice; tobaggan		< qamugh-(n), qamugh-(u)taq				qamun, qamutaq	qamxn, qamxtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1263 \u1085 , \u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qanaghte-	2fyf5ns-	lean forward while pulling something or walking against the wind		qaanghwaaghem qamuutaa aalluku qamughsiighem repall sivutmun qanaghqumaaq \'91he put on the rope pulling the toboggan and was leaning forward from pulling so much\'92; anuqmi aygulghiit qanaghlluteng igleghtaqut \'91those walking against the wind, have their bodies leaning forward\'92													to lean forward while pulling something or walking against the wind				CK A & W 83		qanaghte-	qanaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qanegh-	2fys4-	speak idly															to speak idly		PE qan03- (under PE qan03)				qanegh-	qanegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 -\
qaneghlliqe-	2fys5k]b2s-	reveal confidences			gossip (spread ~)	rumors (spread ~)											to reveal confidences; to spread gossip or rumors		< qaneghlluk-liqe-				qaneghlliqe-	qaneghlliqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qaneghlluk	2fys5k]/r	gossip (one who reveals confidences or spreads ~ or rumors)			rumor-monger												one who reveals confidences or spreads gossip or rumors; mumor-monger		< qanegh-lluk				qaneghlluk	qaneghlluk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
qaneghmig-	2fys4vbu-	put into mouth			chew tobacco												to put into mouth; to chew tobacco		< qaneq-mig-				qaneghmig-	qaneghmig-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
qaneghmik	2fys4vbr	mouth (thing held in ~)			chewing tobacco	tobacco (chewing ~)											thing held in mouth; chewing tobacco		< qaneq-mik				qaneghmik	qaneghmik	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
qaneghmiwaaghusiq	2fys4vb164ecb2	thermometer, oral															oral thermometer		< qaneghmik-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-(u)siq				qaneghmiwaghusiq	qaneghmiwxghusiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qanelek	2fysksr	fortune teller		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 spells (one who casts ~)												fortune teller; one who casts spells				CK Rub 257		qanelek	qanelek	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
qanemsug-	2fysvc/u-	incant															to incant		< qanegh-msug-				qanemsug-	qanemsug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qanemsuk	2fysvc/r	incantation		qanemsugginaghqun aliightesimakanga \'91through incantation he caused the good weather to come at last\'92													incantation		< qanegh-msug-				qanemsuk	qanemsuk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
qanengghuq, qanengngiq	2fys34e2. 2fys34b2	mouth sore		seghleghmeng qaneghmiwaaghpenang qanengghughlleqaaten \'91don\'92t put anything bad in your mouth otherwise you\'92ll get a mouth sore\'92; taghnughhaq qanengghughllagumalghii \'91the child got a mouth sore\'92	canker sore												mouth sore; canker sore				CK A & W 83		qanengghuq, qanengngiq	qanengghuq, qanengngiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 , \u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1271 \u1080 \u1179 \
qaneq	2fys2	mouth (anatomical)		qaangha \'91his mouth\'92; qaanqa \'91my mouth\'92, qaanghen \'91your mouth\'92	split end of hair												mouth (anatomical); split end of hair		PE qan03				qaneq	qaneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qangaari	2f36hb	snow, soft, in spring that makes traveling difficult		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 soft snow in spring that makes traveling difficult		from Chukchi ?	x			qangari	qangxri	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1187 \u257 \u1088 \u1080 \
Qangeghsaq	@fys5cz2	Kangighsak Pt. on St. Lawrence Island		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kangighsak Pt. on St. Lawrence Island						Qangeghsaq	Qangeghsaq	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
qangigaq*	2f3buf2	nephew of a man through his brother		qangigaanka \'91my nephews\'92	niece of a man through his brother												male's brother's child; nephew of a man through his brother; niece of a man through his brother		PE qa&i!a3				qangigaq*	qangigaq*	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
qangraagtagh-	2f3h6[nf4-	nibble with crunching sound		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)									
\f0\i0 same as kangghuug-?				to nibble with crunching sound	uhsptn c [hecnjv			CK V & E 184		qangragtagh-	qangrxgtagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1187 \u1088 \u257 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qanguma-	2f3evf-	take a while		aghyuqagni qamiyek qangumagpenatek naavelghaghtuumaniik \'91it didn\'92t take long for his sled to break\'92; nallghusanqigllukek weni qangumaniiqaak \'91he repaired it and he said it lasted for a while\'92	last a while												to take or last a while				CK A & W 84		qanguma-	qanguma-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 -\

\f1\b qani-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2fyb-\super \'a1	\nosupersub see a person off by going with him a short way															to see a person off by going with him a short way		PE qani-				qani-1	qani-1	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub qani-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2fyb-\super \'99	\nosupersub commit suicide		Tamaakut ama suicide-ekat 
\f2\i qaniniiqegkangit
\f0\i0 . Suicide taana 
\f2\i qaninguuq
\f0\i0 , yugtaanghilnguq yugtaq allakaghmetuq. \'91They called suicide 
\f2\i qani
\f0\i0 . Suicide is 
\f2\i qani
\f0\i0 , it\'92s not murder, murder is different.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:166)	suicide (commit ~)												to commit suicide		PE qani-				qani-2	qani-2	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 -\super 2\
\nosupersub qaniglluk	2fyb[k]/r	snow, heavy		unaaq qanigllugllaguyaghtuq \'91it was really snowing heavily this morning\'92													heavy snow		< qanik-lluk				qaniglluk	qaniglluk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
qanigpak	2fyb[gfr	snow falling hard in large flakes															snow falling hard in large flakes		< qanik-ghpak				qanigpak	qanigpak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
qanigraak	2fybuh6r	snowfall, intermittent or light but continuous															intermittent or light but continuous snowfall		< qanik-raak				qanigrak	qanigrxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
qanigughte-	2fybue5ns-	snow starts falling		qanigughtuq \'91it's starting to snow\'92													for snow to start falling		< qanik-(ng)ughte-				qanigughte-	qanigughte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qanigvik	2fybudbr	snow covering narrow open lead in sea ice, looking deceptively like solid sea ice covered with snow		
\f2\i see item 40 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004													snow covering narrow open lead in sea ice, looking deceptively like solid sea ice covered with snow		< qanik-pik (?)				qanigvik	qanigvik	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1075 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
qanii-	2fy7-	go on ahead of others															to go on ahead of others		< qani-?-				qani-	qanx-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1251 -\
qaniite-	2fy7ns-	take supplies further ahead			cache supplies on the way on which one intends to travel												to take supplies further ahead; to cache supplies on the way on which one intends to travel		< qanii-(u)te-				qanite-	qanxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qanik	2fybr	snowflake			snow, falling												snowflake; falling snow		PE qani!				qanik	qanik	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1082 \
qanilghagh-	2fybk4f4-	go on ahead of others		piyugullghiit sukangilleghtaghteng qanilghaqestiisqumakangat \'91while they were walking, they told their slowest walker to go on ahead\'92; qanilghaa, malighqaghnaaghamken \'91start of me, I\'92ll catch up with you\'92	start ahead of others												to start or go on ahead of others		< qani-?- (?)		CK A & W 84		qanilghagh-	qanilghagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qanimigh-	2fybvb4-	finished		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  qanimightaa \'91he worked on it to or toward completion\'92; qanimighngaaq \'91it is finished\'92, \'91it is already the right form\'92; angyam kuyagkaa qanimighngallgha nakmikumaat \'91they chose the keel of the boat that was already the right form\'92; yataaghqelluku wata qanimightaat \'91they got it ready and worked on it some more\'92; qanimighngalghii taani pigu \'91have that one that is already done\'92	worked toward completion												finished; worked on toward completion				CK A & W 84		qanimigh-	qanimigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qanivleghaq	2fybdks4f2	snow, light															light snow		< qanik-vlaaq				qanivleghaq	qanivleghaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qanlagigh-	2fykzub4-	tonsilectomy (get or give a ~)		qanlagightuq \'91he had his tonsils removed\'92; qanlagighaa \'91he removed her tonsils\'92 /													to have or give a tonsilectomy		< qanlak-igh-				qanlagigh-	qanlagigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qanlagllug-	2fykz[k]/u-	tonsilitis (have ~)															to have tonsilitis		< qanlak-llug-				qanlagllug-	qanlagllug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1103 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qanlak	2fykzr	tonsil		qanlagegka \'91my pair of tonsils\'92													tonsil						qanlak	qanlak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \
qanlawaaq	2fykz162	gland, any															any gland		< qanlak-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				qanlawaq	qanlawxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1103 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qanlengi-	2fyks3b-	closer (get ~)		angyat taakwa qanlengiit \'91the boats are coming closer\'92; qanlengiluku liigiksaqmegteggu nunavak \'91they got closer and saw it was  a walrus on ice\'92; qanlengiighlluku enankin liigikiteggu \'91get closer and then see what it is\'92; aghveghniiq qanlengightuq \'91whaling time is starting to get closer\'92	approach												to get closer to (it); to approach		PE qanli- (under PE qan0t-)		CK A & W 84		qanlengi-	qanlengi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 -\
qanlengukun	2fyks3erey	recently		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle									
\f0\i0 check				recently	ytlfdyj			Rub. 255		qanlengukun	qanlengukun	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
qanragh-	2fyhf4-	go ahead, walking or otherwise, of a boat that is being pulled over the ice to scout the way		angyalget kiyang qanraghtengwaaqut tawaten esavghaanneghmeggni \'91boat captains are usually the ones who go ahead to scout the way when a boat is pulled on ice\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qaanraq													to walk or otherwise go ahead of a boat that is being pulled over the ice to scout the way		from Chukchi qanrak \'91?\'92		CK A & W 84		qanragh-	qanragh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qantaawrak	2fyn61hfr	small container for odds and ends			needle case												small container for odds and ends; needle case		< qantaq-?-				qantawrak	qantxwrak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u257 \u1265 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
qantagh-	2fynf4-	put into container		qantaghaa \'91he wrapped it\'92, \'91he put it into a container\'92, \'91he bandaged it\'92 /	wrap	bandage											to put into container; to wrap; to bandage		PY qantaq				qantagh-	qantagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qantagha, qantaghaq	2fynf4f. 2fynf4f2	nearby area		qantaghaq taakwna pagunghaghtuuq \'91there are lots of berries nearby\'92; taakut whangkunnun qantaghatut \'91those people are our near relatives\'92; qantaghaghhantut \'91they are very close\'92; 
\f2\i often used in the plural:
\f0\i0 Naqam naayghaghllagennguq taagegkut aga 
\f2\i qantaghani
\f0\i0  aliilnguut. \'91Consequently those big mountains over there 
\f2\i nearby
\f0\i0  are visible.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:28)	relative (kin)												nearby area; relative (kin)		PY-S qanta3aq (under PE qan0t-)				qantagha, qantaghaq	qantagha, qantaghaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 , \u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qantaghalli-	2fynf4fk]b-	approach			nearer (get ~)												to approach; to get nearer		< qantagha-?-				qantaghalli-	qantaghalli-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
qantaghante-	2fynf4fyns-	nearby (be ~)		qantaghantuq \'91it is nearby\'92 / qantaghanlenguq \'91one that is near\'92; qantaghanlluni \'91being nearby\'92	close (be ~)												to be nearby; to be close		< qantagha-nte-				qantaghante-	qantaghante-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qantaghaqun	2fynf4f2ey	future (in the near ~)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  qantaghaqun kaallequt \'91they will arrive shortly\'92; qantaghaqungiighhaq pilghaaten \'91go soon!\'92; qantaghaqun aghulaqut \'91they left a little while ago\'92	shortly	while (in a ~, or a short ~ ago)								ago (a short while ~)			in the near future; shortly; in a while; a short while ago		< qantagha-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 qantaghaqun	qantaghaqun	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
qantaghhaq	2fynf5f2	mother		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91small container\'92													mother		< qantaq-ghhaq				qantaghhaq	qantaghhaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
qantaghqwaaq	2fynf52162	packaging		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 container	eggshell							check; cf. qantaghwaaq				packaging; container (e.g. sack, box, jar, etc.); eggshell	nfhf. dsitlifz bp egjnht,ktybz \'f8vtijr. zobr. rjhj,rf. ,jkmifz ,fyrf b n>g>\uc0\u960 crjhkegf zqwf	< qantaq-?		Rub. 257		qantaghqwaq	qantaghqwxq	\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qantaghwaaq	2fynf4162	container, empty		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 qantaghwaaghek
\f2\i , for one such container													
\f0\i0 empty container		< qantaq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				qantaghwaq	qantaghwxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qantanguraq	2fynf3ehf2	pouch, often for tobacco, worn on belt			tobacco pouch worn on belt												pouch, often for tobacco, worn on belt		< qantaq-?-				qantanguraq	qantanguraq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
qantanguraq	2fynf3ehf2	container, small															small container		< qantaq-?		VK		qantanguraq	qantanguraq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
qantaq	2fynf2	container		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qantak
\f2\i , for one thing, expecially one uterus	
\f0\i0 mother	wrapper, bandage								uterus, womb			container; wrapper; bandage, mother; uterus 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  womb		PY qantaq				qantaq	qantaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qantaqusiq	2fynf2ecb2	pouch, often for tobacco, worn on belt			tobacco pouch worn on belt												pouch, often for tobacco, worn on belt		< qantaq-?-				qantaqusiq	qantaqusiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qantiigh-	2fyn74-	unwrap		qantiighaa \'91he unwrapped it\'92, \'91he performed a hysterectomy on her\'92 / qaniighumaaq \'91it\'92s been unwrapped\'92, \'91she\'92s had a hysterectomy\'92	hysterectomy (perform or undergo a ~)												to unwrap; to perform or undergo a hysterectomy		< qantaq-(ng)igh-				qantigh-	qantxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1251 \u1271 -\
qapanagh-	2fgfyf4-	work fast		angyaghtumi qapanalghiit piniqepigtaqiit \'91when boating, they really like those who work fast\'92; qapanaatmineng siku ayagaghtaa tenpenaqegkangat angyat \'91due to his ability or habit of working fast, he pushed away a block of ice (in time) that the boat was about to bump\'92	fast (work ~)	energetic (be ~)											to work fast; to be energetic				CK A & W 84		qapanagh-	qapanagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qapanaq	2fgfyf2	energetic person															energetic person				VK		qapanaq	qapanaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
qapengtagh-	2fgs3nf4-	get food by repeatedly diving into the water		qapengtaneghmeggni ukigaghlluteng meghmun iitqaghlluteng eggmiighluteng nuugaqluteng \'91when kittiwakes hunt for food, they splash into the water going under and they go to the surface with food in their mouths\'92	dive (get food by repeatedly diving into the water												to get food by repeatedly diving into the water				CK A & W 84 		qapengtagh-	qapengtagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qapigh-	2fgb4-	skin an animal (or an organ such as a stomach) starting at the mouth and doing it in such a way that the skin is not split			cut slits part way through in a circular design on the surface of a newly covered drum to improve the sound												to skin an animal (or an organ such as a stomach) starting at the mouth and doing it in such a way that the skin is not split; to cut slits part way through in a circular design on the surface of a newly covered drum to improve the sound		PE qapi3-				qapigh-	qapigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qapiighwtagh-	2fg751nf4-	sail zig-zagging against the wind in a boat		angyat aygumun taan\'92ga qapiighwtaatut \'91the boats are sailing zig-zagging against the wind out there\'92; qapiighwtaghluteng tekeghin ivgaghaat \'91they went around the ice point by zig-zagging on a sail boat\'92	tack into the wind (of a sailboat)												to sail zig-zagging against the wind in a boat; to tack into the wind (of a sailboat)				CK A & W 84		qapighwtagh-	qapxghwtagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1251 \u1203 \u1265 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qapiyeghte-	2fgbqs5ns-	loose the voice from shouting		atughllagluteng unaami iglagit qapiyeghsimakangi \'91they sang so hard, the next day they had lost their voices\'92; chearleader-et iglagit qapiyeghsimii \'91the cheerleaders lost their voices\'92	voice (lose one\'92s ~ from shouting)	hoarse (get ~)											to lose one\'92s voice from shouting; to get hoarse				CK A & W 84		qapiyeghte-	qapiyeghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Qapleq	@fgk]s2	Sireniki in Chukotka (cliff near ~)		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 cliff near Sireniki in Chukotka				CK		Qapleq	Qapleq	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1087 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
qaprag-	2fgifu-	move (make a ~)		qapragtuq \'91he is moving\'92 / qapragtaa \'91he made it move, shook it a little\'92; qapraglluku teghtughtaa \'91he woke him up by shaking him\'92; yughaghvigmi mekelghiighhaq qapragtuq \'91the little boy was squirming and fidgeting a lot in church\'92; qinuyuk liisigalnguq esghapagngaamni qaprakestaghtuq \'91the comatose patient slowly started to move\'92	squirm	fidget								active (be ~)			to make a move; to squirm; to fidget; to move around; to be active; to show signs of life						qaprag-	qaprag-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1096 \u1072 \u1075 -\
qaprakayuk	2fgifrf/r	flexible thing		qawaak tuqunikan qaprakayuguuq salin \'91the bird you said was dead can still move\'92; aqumutam ighunga ataasiq qaprakayuguuq \'91one of the legs of the chair is wobbly\'92	movable thing	wobbly thing											flexible thing; movable thing; wobbly thing		< qaprag-kayuk				qaprakayuk	qaprakayuk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \
qaprekenghagh-	2fgisrsy4f4-	move slowly			motions (make small ~)												to make small motions; to slowly move about		< qaprag-?-				qaprekenghagh-	qaprekenghagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1096 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qapriitugh-	2fgi7ne4-	restlessly move around		uugta angyat takuyaghluku uyavanlluni ateghtuq, nutemnguq qapriitulghii \'91the seal on ice that the boat was approaching went down, it was constantly moving anyway\'92	constantly move around												to be constantly move around; to restlessly move around		< qaprag-?-		CK A & W 85		qapritugh-	qaprxtugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1096 \u1251 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qapruun	2fgi8y	knot used to connect a rope to a smaller rope		
\f2\i as when connecting the end of the main harpoon line to another which is attached to the harpoon shaft													
\f0\i0 knot used to connect a rope to a smaller rope						qaprun	qaprxn	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1096 \u1263 \u1085 \
Qapsukalek	@fgc/rfksr	Kapsukalik Lake on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kapsukalik Lake on St. Lawrence Is.						Qapsukalek	Qapsukalek	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1087 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
qapuk	2fger	roll of fat on human belly		qapunguq \'91he's getting a roll of fat\'92; qapulguuq \'91he has a roll of fat\'92	fat roll on human belly	rolling sea											roll of fat on human belly; rolling sea		PE qap9a!				qapuk	qapuk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1082 \
qaqaghta	2f2f5nf	parka hood, woman\'92s, with a point or ridge on top															woman's parka hood with a point or ridge on top						qaqaghta	qaqaghta	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
qaqasa-	2f2fcf-	reject		qaqasayagulluku ilani unisimakanga \'91he didn\'92t want his company so he left him\'92	want (not ~ (one\'92s company))												to not want (one\'92s company); to reject				CK A & W 84		qaqasa-	qaqasa-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1072 -\
qaqasayug-	2f2fcz/u-	discomfort (feel ~ (especially from filth))															to feel discomfort (especially from filth)				VK		qaqasayug-	qaqasayug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qaqayuugte-	2f2f0[ns-	feel better, especially after being ill		qinuyugllak weninguq qaqayuugtaquq \'91he\'92s feeling much better from his bad illness\'92; wata qaqayuugsimalghii ighivgaghniineng \'91he has perked up compared to yesterday \'91; sameng qaqayuugutaqat \'91what are they so perky about?\'92	perk up								sounds good; explained as: pinighyuuglleghhiit iilqelluteng				to feel better, especially after being ill; to perk up				A&W 11		qaqayugte-	qaqayxgte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaqete-	2f2sns-	nick an animal hide when scraping the blubber off		uqiighyaaghsuwhaalghiini qaqetinalghii \'91it\'92s easy to nick an animal hide when one\'92s a begginer\'92													to nick an animal hide when scraping the blubber off				CK A & W 85		qaqete-	qaqete-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaqiighwtagh-	2f275nf4-	wind gusts suddenly in a sheltered area															for there to be a sudden gust of wind in a sheltered area				VK		qaqighwtagh-	qaqxghwtagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qaqiighwtaq	2f275nf2	gust of wind, sudden, in a sheltered area															sudden gust of wind in a sheltered area				VK		qaqighwtaq	qaqxghwtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qaqiighwte-	2f2751ns-	gust (experience a sudden ~ of wind)		mangtegham uqiigha qaqiighwtaghllaguuq \'91the shielded part of the house is getting gusts of wind\'92; anuqlighyaqminigu qaqiighwtalleq iknaqughtaa \'91when the wind picked up, the gusts got stronger\'92													to experience a sudden gust of wind				CK A & W 85		qaqighwte-	qaqxghwte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1203 \u1265 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaqilqa-	2f2bk]2f-	undecided (be ~)		eslam seghleqaniim qaqilqastaa \'91the bad weather is making him hesitant\'92; qaqilqaaqut nulughyaghnalutengllu quugsaghtughnalutengllu \'91they are undecided whether to go fishing or to go gather driftwood\'92	hesitant (be ~)	second thoughts (have ~)											to be undecided; to be hesitant; to have second thoughts						qaqilqa-	qaqilqa-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 -\
qaqiyugte-	2f2b/[ns-	excited (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 happy (be ~)	cheer up											to be excited; to be happy; to cheer up				CK Rub 247		qaqiyugte-	qaqiyugte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaqlaghqun	2f2k]z52ey	rope used to attach pole to a beam on a summer house or the the hoop around the circumference of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rope used to attach pole to a beam on a summer house or the the hoop around the circumference of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)				CK Rub 247		qaqlaghqun	qaqlaghqun	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
Qaqlungighik	@f2k]/3b4br	Kaklungegek (Cr.) on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kaklungegek (Cr.) on St. Lawrence Is.						Qaqlungighik	Qaqlungighik	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1082 \
qaqsungiq	2f2c/3b2	black-legged kittiwake			kittiwake, black-legged	
\f2\i Rissa tridactyla											
\f0\i0 black-legged kittiwake (Rissa tridactyla)						qaqsungiq	qaqsungiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
qaquuragh-	2f28hf4-	crucify		
\f2\i Qaquuraghluku 
\f0\i0 tuqutestekaqaghsi \'85. \'91Crucifiying him you let him be killed \'85.\'92 (Acts 5:30)													to crucify						qaquragh-	qaqxragh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1263 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qaquuraq	2f28hf2	cross		Kitum alngunak 
\f2\i qaquurani
\f0\i0  tuguyunghilkumigu maliggnaanghitaang, enkaam whangamni itagnanghituq. \'91Whosoever doesn\'92t take up his 
\f2\i cross
\f0\i0  and follow me, is not worthy of me.\'92 (Matthew 10.38)	crucifix												cross; crucifix		PE qaqu(3) \'91crosspiece of paddle, or the like\'92				qaquraq	qaqxraq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1263 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
qarkanighnighte-	2fhrfyb4yb5ns-	go out and about		sameng qivghullelguneghmeggni qarkaghnighhnanighaqut \'91when people have grief feelings, they don\'92t go anywhere too much\'92													to go out and about				CK A & W 85		qarkanighnighte-	qarkanighnighte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1088 \u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qarqaghni-	2fi2f4yb-	withdrawn (be ~ (from the company of others))															to be withdrawn (from the company of others)				VK		qarqaghni-	qarqaghni-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1096 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 -\
qarta	2finf	matted fur		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  = qerta	matted tangled hair or fur												matted tangled hair or fur		PE qalt0		CK Rub 262		qarta	qarta	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1096 \u1090 \u1072 \
qasaghqugh-	2fcz52e4-	slap repeatedly		ilagaghta qasaghquutaat \'91they clapped for the singer\'92; gginaakun qasaghquumakanga \'91he slapped him repeatedly on his face\'92	clap hands in applause												to slap repeatedly; to clap hands in applause		< qasaghte-qugh-				qasaghqugh-	qasaghqugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qasaghte-	2fcz5ns-	slap with palm of hand		qasaghtaa \'91he slapped it\'92 /													to slap with palm of hand		PE qaca3-				qasaghte-	qasaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaseki	2fcsrb	stink															stink	djym			CK V & E 132, CK		qaseki	qaseki	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1080 \
qasiggnanigh-	2fcb[y]fyb4-	going to a certain place very often		igaghvigmun qasiggnaniitut liinnaqem \'91they always went to the school because of the desire to learn\'92; ilakumtaani qasiggnanighvikaa \'91he goes to his friend all the time\'92													to go to a certain place very often				CK A & W 85		qasiggnanigh-	qasiggnanigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1093 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qasigte-	2fcb[ns-	go to some specific place															to go to some specific place				VK\'92s notes		qasigte-	qasigte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qasike-	2fcbrs-	agree with		qasikusigalnguut \'91people who are always bickering\'92	get along with												to agree with; to get along with		cf. PE qaca!-				qasike-	qasike-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qasiqaghqe-	2fcb2f52s-	cry of a baby walrus		qasiqaghquq \'91there\'92s the cry of a baby walrus\'92													for there to be the cry of a baby walrus		< qasiqaq-?-		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 157		qasiqaghqe-	qasiqaghqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qasiqaq	2fcb2f2	baby walrus		Awavani sikum qaaynganun uugtuq aghnasalek 
\f2\i qasiqalek
\f0\i0 . Taakut ayveghuut. 
\f2\i Qasiqaghhaq
\f0\i0  ingaghtuq naaminun mallegluni. \'91Way over there a cow walrus with 
\f2\i calves
\f0\i0  hauled out on the surface of the ice. They are walrus. The little 
\f2\i walrus
\f0\i0  
\f2\i calf
\f0\i0  lay down near its mother.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 67)	walrus calf												baby walrus; walrus calf						qasiqaq	qasiqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
qasiqi-	2fcb2b-	butcher baby walrus meat			play the second part in a woman's ball game where each part is named after a different operation in sea mammal catching												to butcher baby walrus meat; to play the second part in a woman's ball game where each part is named after a different operation in sea mammal catching		< qasiqaq-li-				qasiqi-	qasiqi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1080 -\
qaspeghaq	2fcgs4f2	outer protective garment		qergesek qaspeghalguuklu \'91the window also has an outer pane\'92; ayapghaatak nuverraqak qaspeghangllaghqek \'91make an outer protective cover for the knitted mittens\'92; anigu sikughnakaq qanigllugughlluni qaspeghighaa \'91the snow that became icy was covered by fresh snow in the big snowfall\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qaspighte-	layer, outer	great-grandchild							I\'92m a little skeptical about \'93great-grandchild\'94; I think I got it from VK, but am not sure -- (later) HERE IT IS in SLI Cur. Res. Man. 148!	cover			outer protective garment; outer layer; great-grandchild; cover		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -?-ghaq				qaspeghaq	qaspeghaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qaspighneq	2fcgb4ys2	pile of things, large		yugem qaspighneq amiq akikaa 22-mun suflugangusiqaa \'91the man bartered a goodly pile of skins for a 22 rifle\'92	heap												large pile of things; heap		< qaspighte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub qaspighneq	qaspighneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1087 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qaspighte-	2fcgb5ns-	pile up			put on or wear outer layer(s) of clothing												to pile up; to put on or wear outer layer(s) of clothing		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -?-				qaspighte-	qaspighte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1087 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaspighun	2fcgb4ey	layered sea ice, safe to walk on though each piece would not be		
\f2\i see item 49 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva 2004	sea ice type												piled up fairly thin layers of sea ice, safe to walk on though each piece would not be		< qaspighte-(u)n				qaspighun	qaspighun	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1087 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
qasqite-	2fc2bns-	reach the top		qasqituq \'91he reached the top\'92 /													to reach the top		PE qa9qa3- (under PE qa90); < qaya\super e\nosupersub  -qite-				qasqite-	qasqite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qasquviik	2fc2ed7r	care		akuzillgha qasquviik tusaqniitngwaaghtuq \'91he speaks so softly that it is not understandable\'92; tapghaghpawaaq sakeqsugumaaq qasquviigmeng nengnnaken \'91the twine breaks easily, so stretch it carefully\'92; qasquviigmeng saaftaa \'91he touched it softly\'92; qasquviigmeng akuziiq \'91he spoke vaguely\'92	soft touch (as in \'91with a soft touch\'92)	light touch								vagueness			care; soft touch (as in \'91with a soft touch\'92); light touch; vagueness				CK A & W 86		qasquvik	qasquvxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1251 \u1082 \
qasuq	2fce2	good weather after a storm		qasaani uum angyaghuullequt \'91after this storm, they will go boating\'92; qasuneghsighaqaat igleghqaannaluteng \'91they are waiting for the storm to clear up, so they can all leave\'92													good weather after a storm				CK A & W 86		qasuq	qasuq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1089 \u1091 \u1179 \
qategh-	2fns4-	white (be ~)		qateghtuq 'it is white' / qatelghii 'white thing'													to be white		PE qat03-				qategh-	qategh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 -\
qateghlluk	2fns5k]/r	calm water		qateghllugmi igleghhneq teghignaghtuq 'traveling on glassy water is enjoyable'	smooth water	glassy water								water, calm, smooth or glassy			calm, smooth, glassy, water		< qategh-lluk (?)				qateghlluk	qateghlluk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
qateghnaq	2fns4yf2	white-out weather conditions															white-out weather conditions		< qategh-naq				qateghnaq	qateghnaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
qateghrakegtaq	2fns4hfrs[nf2	white (very ~ thing)															very white thing		< qategh-?-kegtaq				qateghrakegtaq	qateghrakegtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qateghrapak	2fns4hfgfr	slush sea ice that has hardened enough to give an illusory impression of being safe for walking		
\f2\i truly white in color in contrast to more solid ice; see item 50 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004		sea ice (slush ~ that has hardened enough to give an illusory impression of being safe for walking)											slush sea ice that has hardened enough to give an illusory impression of being safe for walking		< qategh-?-				qateghrapak	qateghrapak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
qateghrewaaq	2fns4hs162	white (off-~ thing)			McKay's bunting	snow bunting								
\f2\i Plectrophenax hyperboreus or nivalis			
\f0\i0 off-white thing; McKay's bunting (Plectrophenax hyperboreus); snow bunting (Plectrophenax nivalis)		< qategh-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				qateghrewaq	qateghrewxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1099 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qateghtekaq	2fns5nsrf2	white-haired old man			old man, white-haired	man, old and white-haired											white-haired old man		< qategh-?-				qateghtekaq	qateghtekaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
qateghyiighaq*	2fns4q74f2*	little bird		Iiwen, 
\f2\i Qateghyiighaghhaay
\f0\i0 , meghtanghilkuvek, ighsakuvek , tuqulluten, gaaghluten, neghelleqamken. \'91See here, 
\f2\i little bitty bird
\f0\i0 , if you don\'92t pack water, if you refuse, I\'92ll kill you, cook and eat you.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 32)	bird, little								species ?)				little bird		< qategh-?-				qateghyighaq*	qateghyxghaq*	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1253 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1262 \
qategmigute-	2fnsuvbuens-	land chest or belly down down		yuuk qiighnilluni sikukun qategmigutuq \'91a man slipped and landed on the ice on the front of his body\'92; tengegkayugwem itegani aanestegpenaki  qategmigutmeng nalugtuq \'91the plane didn\'92t put its landing gear out, so it landed on its belly\'92													to land chest or belly down		< qatek-mik-(u)te-		CK A & W 86		qategmigute-	qategmigute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qatek	2fnsr	breast of bird		qaatgit \'91their breasts\'92													bird's breast		PE qate!				qatek	qatek	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
qatelghii	2fnsk47	white thing			fox, arctic	
\f2\i Alopex lagopus							
\f0\i0 check; we have this meaning \'91white thing\'92, the other two glosses are reasonable more or less				white thing; arctic fox
\f2\i  (Alopex lagopus)	
\f0\i0 ,tksq. ;blrbq xfq.gtctw	< qategh-lghii		Rub. 260		qatelghi	qatelghx	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
qatepak	2fnsgfr	common eider		
\f2\i specifically the male	
\f0\i0 eider, common	
\f2\i Somateria mollissima											
\f0\i0 common eider 
\f2\i (Somateria mollissima)		
\f0\i0 < qatek-ghpak (?)				qatepak	qatepak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
qati-	2fnb-	string bird breasts and hang them outside to dry															to string bird breasts and hang them outside to dry		< qatek-i\super 2\nosupersub -		VK		qati-	qati-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1080 -\
qatmigtaq	2fnvb[nf2	boom (of a sail)			pole at bottom of sail	pole used in physical training											boom (of a sail); pole at bottom of sail; pole used in physical training		< qatmik-taq\super 1				\nosupersub qatmigtaq	qatmigtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1084 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qatmik	2fnv]br	pole, long wooden, carried in a boat and used for pushing ice away		qatmigetlu uygulluki qalugyamun qalugyaasiqaqiit \'91they add ice-pushing poles as whaling lances fastening them as extensions on the (actual) whaling lance\'92									check; explained as : unaghsit taakelghiit amestaaghhat angyamun kelqutaaghet ayaghqusit sikulighwaami, which VK translates as \'91a long wooden pole that is carried in boating to push off loose ice away from the path of the boat\'92				long wooden pole carried in a boat and used for pushing ice away		cf. PE qat&u3- 'pry (heavy object) loose'		A&W 86	qatmigtaq	qatmik	qatmik	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1082 \
qavaa-	2fd6-	asleep (be ~)		qavaaguq 'he is asleep' / qavaawa(a)? \'91is he asleep?\'92													to be asleep		< qavagh-(ng)u-				qava-	qavx-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u257 -\
qavaasiq	2fd6cb2	pajamas		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qavaasik, 
\f2\i for one pair of pajamas													
\f0\i0 pajamas		< qavagh-(u)siq		CK Rub 239		qavasiq	qavxsiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qavagh-	2fdf4-	sleep		qavaghtuq 'he slept' /	fall asleep	go to sleep											to sleep; to fall asleep		PE qava3-				qavagh-	qavagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qavaghni-	2fdf4yb-	sleepy (be ~)		qavaghniiq 'he is sleepy' /													to be sleepy		PE qava3ni- (under PE qava3-); < qavagh-?-				qavaghni-	qavaghni-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 -\
qavaghsiq	2fdf5cb2	yearling bearded seal		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qavagh-	bearded seal, yearling	
\f2\i Erignathus barbatus 
\f0\i0 (bearded seal) yearling											yearling bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus)						qavaghsiq	qavaghsiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qavaghtagh-	2fdf5nf4-	stay several nights in the ocean, ice or wilderness		angyat mellaalluki taan\'92gani qavaghtaghtut \'91a boat was trapped by ice in the ocean so they stayed several nights out there\'92; nunaaghmi yuuk ullghitiighulluni qavaghtaamalghii \'91a man broke down on his wheeled/tracked vehicle in the tundra and stayed several nights out there\'92	camp out												to stay several nights in the ocean, ice or wilderness; to camp out		+ PY qava3ta3- 'camp out' (cf. Central Alaskan Yup'ik qavaXta3- 'camp out')		CK A & W 86 CK 		qavaghtagh-	qavaghtagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qavaghvik	2fdf4dbr	bed			bedroom												bed; bedroom; place to sleep		PY-S qava3vik (under PE qava3-); < qavagh-vik				qavaghvik	qavaghvik	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
qavaghwaagh-	2fd\'834164-	oversleep															to oversleep	ghjcgfnm	< qavagh-(ngw/ghw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -		Rub. 239 CK		qavaghwagh-	qavaghwxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u769 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
Qavalghak	@fdfk4fr	Kavalghak Bay, southern end, on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 southern end of Kavalghak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.						Qavalghak	Qavalghak	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1082 \
qavalighraq	2fdfkb4hf2	walrus sleeping in water with its head out		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 walrus sleeping in water with its head out		< qavagh-?-		CK Rub 239		qavalighraq	qavalighraq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
qavaneghpalluq	2fdfys5gfk]/2	deep sleeper			late sleeper												deep or late sleeper		< qavagh-neq\super 1\nosupersub -palluq				qavaneghpalluq	qavaneghpalluq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \
qavangsi-	2fdf3cb-	nap (take a ~)			dose off												to take a nap; to dose off		< qavagh-ngsi-				qavangsi-	qavangsi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1187 \u1089 \u1080 -\
qavangugh-	2fdf3e4-	dream															to dream		PY qava&uq (under PE qava3-); < qavagh-?-				qavangugh-	qavangugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qavangughtaa-	2fdf3e5n6-	dream (repeatedly, or repeatedly about the same thing)															to have repeated dreams about one thing; to repeatedly have dreams		< qavaghtugh-?-		VK\'92s notes		qavangughta-	qavangughtx-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 -\
qavangughtugh-	2fdf3e5ne4-	dream		aghnaq qavangughtuq aghvilghii \'91the woman had a dream of going across to the mainland\'92													to dream		< qavanguq-tugh\super 1\nosupersub -		CK		qavangughtugh-	qavangughtugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qavanguq	2fdf3e2	dream															a dream		PY qava&uq (under PE qava3-); < qavagh-?-				qavanguq	qavanguq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
qavangurruuk	2fdf3e4ei8r	nightmare															nightmare		< qavanguq-?		CK		qavangurruk	qavangurrxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1096 \u1263 \u1082 \
qavaq	2fdf2	sleep		Estamat 
\f2\i qavat
\f0\i0  atughluki nemnun aglaghllequnga. \'91I will be going home after four 
\f2\i days
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 49); Kiyang pingayu whanga qavaghlluki peghqightaataqaqanka, pingayu 
\f2\i qavaq
\f0\i0 . \'91It usually took me three days to break them in, three 
\f2\i days
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:90)	night and a day (in duration)	day and a night (in duration)											a day and a night (in duration); sleep		PE qava3-				qavaq	qavaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
qavayiilliqe-	2fdfq7k]s2s-	toss and turn in one\'92s sleep		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check length of i; given short, but perhaps should be long (from -yiite-)				toss and turn in one\'92s sleep	hfp,hfcsdfnmcz dj cyt	< qavagh-yiite-lliqe-		Rub. 239		qavayilliqe-	qavayxlliqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1253 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qavigh-	2fdb4-	slanted		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  qavightuq \'91it got slanted\'92; qavightaa \'91he slanted it, put it at an angle\'92; qavighngaaq \'91it is slanted\'92; qavimun \'91diagonally\'92	diagonal												slanted; diagonal		PY qavi3-				qavigh-	qavigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qaviighte-	2fd75ns-	disturb one's sleep															to disturb one's sleep		< qavagh-?-				qavighte-	qavxghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaviighute-	2fd74ens-	reveal one\'92s dream to (him)		qaviighutaa \'91he told him his dream\'92													to reveal one\'92s dream to (him)		< qavaq-(ng)igh-(u)te-		VK		qavighute-	qavxghute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaviighyuketaq	2fd74m/rsnf2	light sleeper															light sleeper		< qavagh-(ng)igh-yu-ketaq				qavighyuketaq	qavxghyuketaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qavini-	rfdbyb-	half-awake (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to be half-awake		< qavagh-?-		CK Rub 240		qavini-	qavini-	\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 -\
qaviri-	2fdbhb-	waking up (have difficulty ~)															to have difficulty waking up		< qavagh-?-				qaviri-	qaviri-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1088 \u1080 -\
qavite-	2fdbns-	tell one's dreams		qavitaa \'91he told him his dreams\'92 /	dreams (tell one\'92s ~)												to tell one's dreams to (him)		< qavagh-?-				qavite-	qavite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qavlegh-	2fdks4-	shimmer		qavleqegtaq \'91glittery thing\'92; = evlegh-, qelmegh-, uvlegh-	glitter	shiny (be ~)											to shimmer; to glitter; to be shiny		PE q0vl03-				qavlegh-	qavlegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
qavngaghhaaneng	2fd3f56ys3	time (for some ~ in the past)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 for some time in the past		< qavngaq-ghhaq-
\f2\i ablative-modalis				
\f0\i0 qavngaghhaneng	qavngaghhxneng	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \
qavngaghllaggaaneng	2fd3f5k]z[6ys3	time (for a very long ~ (many years) in the past)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 for a very long time (many years) in the past		< qavngaq-ghllak-ghhaq-
\f2\i ablative-modalis				
\f0\i0 qavngaghllagganeng	qavngaghllaggxneng	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1093 \u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \
qavngaghniistun	2fd3f4y7cney	past (as in the ~)		
\f2\i particle:
\f0\i0  qavngaghniistun eslallugtunaquq \'91it is going to be rainy as in the past\'92													as in the past		< qavngaq-?-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 qavngaghnistun	qavngaghnxstun	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
qavngaghtaq	2fd3f5nf2	thing of the past			past (thing of the ~)												thing of the past	yf lyz[	< qavngaq-taq\super 2		\nosupersub CK V & E 125 (Russ vocab)		qavngaghtaq	qavngaghtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qavngalqinaq	2fd3fk]2byf2	ago (quite a while ~)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  qavngalqinaq Quutmiit maapikayuguyaghtut \'91Chukotkans used to come here for visits quite a while back\'92; qinuyukaaguq qavngalqinaq ima \'91he has been sick for quite a while\'92													quite a while ago	rjulf-nj lfdyj	< qavngaq-?-(ng)inaq		CK V & E 125  (Russ vocab)		qavngalqinaq	qavngalqinaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
qavnganghhaq	2fd3\'83y5f2	recently		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 ago (a few days ~								sounds good				recently; a few days ago	ytlfdyj. yf lyz[ \'f8j ghjikjv\uc0\u960 	< qavngaq-nghhaq		Rub. 240		qavnganghhaq	qavnganghhaq	\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1187 \u1072 \u769 \u1085 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
qavngaq	2fd3f2	when (in the past)		
\f2\i particle: 
\f0\i0 qavngaq kaasin? \'91when did you arrive?\'92; qavngaq kaatuq \'91he arrived some time ago\'92	ago (some time ~)												when (in the past  past); some time ago	rjulf\\ rjulf-nj	PY qa&vaq (under PE qa&a)		CK V & E 125 (Russ vocab)		qavngaq	qavngaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \
qavngarugllaggaaneng	2fd3fhe[k]z[6ys3	past (for a long time in the ~)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 for a long time in the past		< qavngaq-rugllak-ghhaq-
\f2\i ablative-modalis				
\f0\i0 qavngarugllagganeng	qavngarugllaggxneng	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1187 \u1072 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1093 \u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \
qavraan, qavraataq	2fdh6y. 2fdh6nf2	ladle, large			spoon for stirring												large ladle; stirring spoon		< qavragh-(u)n, qavragh-(u)taq				qavran, qavrataq	qavrxn, qavrxtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1088 \u257 \u1085 , \u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1088 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qavraataq	2fdh6nf2	gulch		
\f2\i also used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 qavraatat
\f2\i , for one ravine	
\f0\i0 ravine												gulch; ravine		maybe from Chuchi qenyew \'91ravine\'92 				qavrataq	qavrxtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1088 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Qavraatat	@fdh6nfn	ravine on northwest side of Ivekan Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.															ravine on northwest side of Ivekan Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		< qavragh-(u)te-aq-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Qavratat	Qavrxtat	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1074 \u1088 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \
qavragh-	2fdhf4-	mingle			join the crowd	lose an artifact which one has dug up by its mixing with the debris from the digging											to mingle; to join the crowd; to lose an artifact which one has dug up by its mixing with the debris from the digging		PE qa9va3- (under PE qa90-)				qavragh-	qavragh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qavreq, qavraq	2fdhs2. 2fdhf2	walrus migrating north after the ice has gone		qavreq naghughqaghtuq taaga elngaatall \'91oh my, so many walrus have been seen migrating north\'92; qavreghyaghtuq \'91he is hunting migrating walrus\'92													walrus migrating north after the ice has gone						qavreq, qavraq	qavreq, qavraq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1088 \u1099 \u1179 , \u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
qawa	2f1f	sharp curve on slope of mountain		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 sharp curve on slope of mountain	rhenjq pfrheuktyysq crkjy ujhs			CK V & E 43		qawa	qawa	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \
Qawaagem Ateghviga	@f16usv Fns4dbuf	September		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  'the time of (baby) birds going down (from nests)'													September		< qawaak + ategh-vik			xxxa	Qawagem ateghviga	Qawxgem ateghviga	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 \u1099 \u1084  \u1040 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \
qawaagllugtagh-	2f16[k]e[nf4-	interfere		qawaagllugtaamaniiquq uqlighlleghhii ilaminun nuuget awavaghtaqluki \'91he said he had interfered with the others and caused the seals to stay away\'92; tuumkun nekeglluteng qawaagllugtaghniit \'91they said they placed themselves on the trail and got in the way\'92	get in the way of others												to interfere; to get in the way of others				CK A & W 86, VK		qawagllugtagh-	qawxgllugtagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qawaagniigh-	2f16uy74-	hunt birds		qawaagniightuq \'91he hunted birds\'92 /	birds (hunt ~)												to hunt birds		< qawaak-niigh-				qawagnigh-	qawxgnxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
qawaagniighusiq	2f16uy74ecb2	bird hunting device			shotgun												bird hunting device; shotgun		< qawaagniigh-(u)siq				qawagnighusiq	qawxgnxghusiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qawaagpak	2f16[gfr	golden eagle			eagle, golden	
\f2\i Aquila chrysaetos								
\f0\i0 legendary large bird that can carry off people			golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos); legendary large bird that can carry off people		< qawaak-ghpak				qawagpak	qawxgpak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
qawaagyagh-	2f16uz4-	go bird-hunting		qawaagyaghtuq \'91he went bird-hunting\'92 /													to go bird-hunting		< qawaak-yagh-				qawagyagh-	qawxgyagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 \u1103 \u1271 -\
qawaagyak	2f16umzr	flock of birds		
\f2\i sometimes used in the plural,
\f0\i0  qawaagyaget, 
\f2\i for one flock									
\f0\i0 check; this postbase is usually used in the plural which would suggest *qawaagyaget (though Rub. gives the unlikely plural: qawaagyat (!))				flock of ducks	cnfz enjr	< qawaak-yaga\super e		\nosupersub Rub. 261		qawagyak	qawxgyak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
qawaagyaq	2f16z2	bird hunter			hunter of birds												bird hunter		< qawaak-yagh\super 1\nosupersub -				qawagyaq	qawxgyaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1103 \u1179 \
qawaak	2f16r	bird		
\f2\i any bird other than a small bird;
\f0\i0  qawaaget \'91birds\'92; Kiigmi nunaaghmelnguut yuget kiyang unangniighet neghsameng, 
\f2\i qawaagmengllu
\f0\i0 . \'91In the summer people at the camp hunt mostly seals and 
\f2\i waterfowl
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:140)	fowl												bird; fowl		PE qav0!a!				qawak	qawxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1082 \
qawaamsighaq	2f16vcb4f2	bird, little		Aghnaghaghhaam pimakanga, \'93
\f2\i Qawaamsighaay
\f0\i0 , meghtaa.\'94 \'91The little girl said, \'93
\f2\i Birdie
\f0\i0 , fetch water.\'94\'92 (AANGHHAQ 29)	birdie												little bird; birdie				Rub. 		qawamsighaq	qawxamsighaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qawaaperaaq	2f16gsh62	chicken (domestic)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 chicken (domestic)		< qawaak-?-raaq		CK Rub 261		qawaperaq	qawxperxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
qawaapik	2f16gbr	duck, wild															wild duck		< qavaak-pik		CK Rub 261		qawapik	qawxpik	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
qawaaqaaqegte-	2f16262s[ns	clear cloudless weather		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 cloudless clear weather	weather (clear cloudless ~)											to have clear cloudless weather	zcyfz gjujlf			CK V & E 22		qawaqaqegte-	qawxqxqegte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 \

\f1\b qawawaaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2f1f162\'a1	figurine (small carved ivory human ~ played with by girls)															small carved ivory human figurine played with by girls						qawawaq1	qawawxq1	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 1\

\f1\b qawawaaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2f1f162\'99	oarlock on boat															oarlock on boat						qawawaq2	qawawxq2	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 2\
qawii-	2f17-	catch lots of birds		qawaagyat qawiisimalghiit \'91the bird hunters caught lots of birds\'92; upenghami alqameng qawiinapigtuq \'91spring is a good time to catch a lot of murres\'92													to catch lots of birds		< qawaak-?-		CK A & W 86 CK		qawi-	qawx-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u1251 -\
qawiighneq	2f174ys2	walrus, dead, found out in the sea															dead whale found out at sea						qawighneq	qawxghneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qaya	2fz	cave		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)													
\f0\i0 cave	gtothf			CK V & E 43; Rub 264		qaya	qaya	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1103 \
qayaawaq	2f91f2	frost		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 frost		from Chukchi qeyew \'91hoarfrost\'92	14			qayawaq	qayxwaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b qaya\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2fz\super s	\nosupersub top		qaaynga \'91its surface\'92; sikum qaaynganituq \'91it is on the surface of the ice\'92; qayegkeni \'91on its surface 
\f2\i (considered here as a dual)
\f0\i0 \'92\'92	surface												top; surface		< PE qa90-		CK V & E 116, CK (localis)		qayae	qayae	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1103 \u1099 \
qayaghtugh-	2fz5ne4-	ride in a kayak		qayaghtughtuq \'91he is riding a kayak\'92; qayaghtughaa \'91he is riding over it (lake, bay, etc.) in a kayak\'92 /	kayak (ride in or travel by ~)	travel by kayak											to ride in or travel by kayak		< qayaq-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				qayaghtugh-	qayaghtugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qayaq	2fz2	kayak		qayaa \'91his kayak\'92; qayiit \'91their kayaks\'92; qayani \'91in the kayaks\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91his own kayak\'92; qayaani \'91in his kayak\'92; Taghnughhaqa 
\f2\i qayangumaaq
\f0\i0  whaa. \'91My baby has a 
\f2\i cradle
\f0\i0  now.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 139)	cradle												kayak; cradle	1. rfzr 2. k/kmrf> rjys,tkm	PE qaya3				qayaq	qayaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1103 \u1179 \
qayayaygay	2fzzqufq	oh-oh-oh!		
\f2\i particle; Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  qayayaygay! ukaqenghhaqa upughanepiguuq \'91oh! oh! oh! the new daughter-in-law is really hospitable\'92													oh-oh-oh!				CK Rub 265		qayayaygay	qayayaygay	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1103 \u1103 \u1253 \u1075 \u1072 \u1253 \
qayeghpigaq	2fqs5gbuf2	highest peak of a mountain or highest level			top												highest peak of a mountain; highest level; top		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -pigaq				qayeghpigaq	qayeghpigaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
qayeligh-	2fqskb4-	cover		maqaghiitaq qayelighaa \'91he put a second layer of insulation on it\'92	put on outer layer												to cover; to put on outer layer		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -ligh-				qayeligh-	qayeligh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qayemgu	2fqsvue	tree bark		
\f2\i see item 51 on list in Oozeva et al. 
\f0\i0 2004	ice or frost coating on beach from wind-blown ocean spray making surface slippery and walking difficult												tree bark; coating of ice or frost on beach from wind-blown ocean spray making surface slippery and walking difficult	j,ott yfpdfybt ghbgfz\\ dscjrb7 ,thtujdj7 ghbgf7	PE qay0m!u(3), and PE qa(C)03u(3)		CK V & E 25; Rub 245; Oozeva 50		qayemgu	qayemgu	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1084 \u1075 \u1091 \
qayengestagh-	2fqs3scnf4-	drink hot beverage while doing something else		qepghaallghiit qayengestaataqut \'91the workers are having tea while working\'92; qayengestaghvik kaasan qayuutut \'91when quick tea time came, they had tea\'92	beverage (have a drink of a hot ~ while doing something else)	tea (quickly have a cup of ~ or other hot beverage)											to drink hot beverage while doing something else; to quickly have a cup of tea or other hot beverage		< qayugh-ngestagh-		CK A & W 86		qayengestagh-	qayengestagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qayengnaqi-	2fqs3yf2b-	make clothes for the family		neghighluku aghnat qayengnaqistenguyalghiit \'91in the old days, the women were the ones who made the clothes for the family\'92													to make clothes for the family		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -nge-naqe-i\super 1\nosupersub - (?)		CK A & W 87		qayengnaqi-	qayengnaqi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1080 -\
qayetghute-	2fqsn[5ens-	exceed in value		qayetghulluku akinga tukfighaa \'91he bought it for more than it was worth\'92; neghsam amiiraaneng tuunaanga qulligkaneng qayetghutaaghaghluku \'91he gave me more sealskins than necessary for making hunting pants\'92	more (do ~ than needed)	bekond (go ~ what's necessary)											to exceed in value; to do more than needed; to go beyond what's necessary	ltkfnm xnj-k ,jkit. xtv ghtlgjkfufkjcnm	< qaya\super e\nosupersub -tghute-		CK V & E 138 (Russ voc)		qayetghute-	qayetghute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaygeghqe-	2fqus52s-	uncover		uglaq amyak qaygeghqaa iiglluni mangteghilleghni \'91he uncovered a large amount of mussel shells at the old village site\'92; qaygeghqaa sangwaa nallukegkaghput aksaqegkaayalghii efqughraq allgeghhnaqneghmeng \'91so that justice might prevail he brought to light a lot of secrets not previously known to us\'92	discover	surface (bring to the ~)								bring to the surface			to uncover; to discover; to bring to the surface; to pull out from under		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -?-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				qaygeghqe-	qaygeghqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1075 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qaygeghte-	2fqus5ns-	reach the top		Iiwenllu quulngughutanga aghneq qukaghtaquq naayghamun 
\f2\i qaygeghsimalghii
\f0\i0 . \'91Then on the tenth day in the middle of the day he 
\f2\i reached the top
\f0\i0  of the mountain.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 19)	top (reach the ~)												to reach the top						qaygeghte-	qaygeghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1075 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qayiigrugtagh-, qayiigtagh-	2fq7uhe[nf4-. 2fq7[nf4-	sound, echoing hollow		qayiigrugtaghtuq yuuk mesiilghutak drum-ek kaagtughyamikek \'91the man made the empty, hollow sounds when he hammered on the oil drum\'92; mekelghiighhaq imiilngughmi mangteghami araquluni qayiigrugtaghtuq \'91the little boy shouted inside the empty house making a hollow empty sound\'92	hollow echoing sound	echoing hollow sound								make a echoing hollow sound			to make a echoing hollow sound		< qayiik-?				qayigrugtagh-, qayigtagh-	qayxgrugtagh-, qayxgtagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1251 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -, \u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1251 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qayiik, qayiigruk	2fq7r. 2fq7uher	sound, hollow echoing			hollow sound	echoing sound											hollow echoing sound				VK		qayik, qayigruk	qayxk, qayxgruk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1251 \u1082 , \u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1251 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
Qayillghet	@fqbk]5sn	Dovelawik Bay (site to the north of ~ (Tevleghak) on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site to north of Dovelawik Bay (Tevleghak) on St. Lawrence Is.						Qayillghet	Qayillghet	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1253 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1099 \u1090 \
qayngun	2fq3ey	probably		
\f2\i particle; also 
\f0\i0 qayngunllu, 
\f2\i and 
\f0\i0 qayngunqun; Kaviighhaam pii, \'93
\f2\i Qayngunqun
\f0\i0  igiiterugumangillaataghtuten!\'94 \'91Fox replied, \'93
\f2\i I bet
\f0\i0 , as usual, you were up to your old tricks again!\'94\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:234)	evidently												probably; evidently						qayngun	qayngun	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \
qayug-	2f/u-	strike with an adze when carving		qayugaa unaghsiq \'91he struck the wood with an adze\'92	shape (as when carving)	create (as by carving)								dig with the front leg 			to strike with an adze when carving; to shape, form or create (as by carving); to dig with the front leg 				gloss 4 Rub 262		qayug-	qayug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qayugh-	2f/4-	drink tea, broth or other hot beverage		qayughtuq \'91he drank a hot beverage\'92													to drink tea, broth or other hot beverage		PE qayu3-				qayugh-	qayugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 -\
qayugham	2f/4fv	so then		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  Aapsimakanga nanevgam, "
\f2\i Qayugham
\f0\i0  naagu?" \'91The old man asked him, \'93
\f2\i So then
\f0\i0 , where is it?\'94\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. III:15)													so then		< qayuq\super 2\nosupersub =am				qayugham	qayugham	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1084 \
qayugheta	2f/4snf	what is he doing?		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  qayugheta? akikughluki qaikmini, saluningam igleghlleqa? what is he doing? he sold his dogs, now how will he travel?; qayugheta, quyngighpagnitepigta! \'91oh!, how it smells like reindeer!\'92	oh!	what\'92s going on?											what is he doing?; what\'92s going on?; oh!		< qayu\super 2\nosupersub -ete-
\f2\i interrogative				
\f0\i0 qayugheta	qayugheta	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \
qayughllak	2f/5k]zr	because		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  meghnaaliyugtunga qayughllak meghnupigtunga \'91I want to rest because I am very tired\'92; neghnaquq qayughllak igataghpetuq \'91he is going to eat because, evidentally, he is hungry\'92; "Aa, sakun tagistek?" "Qayakun tagikung. 
\f2\i Qayughllak
\f0\i0  nunamnni seghletun kiyaghlleghhiikung, enngaatall umiilegput seghlepiguuq \'85. \'91\'93Ah, by what means did you two come?\'94 \'93We came by kayak. 
\f2\i Because
\f0\i0  in our land we lived badly, our chief was very bad \'85.\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 36)													because		< qayuq\super 2\nosupersub -ghllak				qayughllak	qayughllak	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
qayughmi	2f/4vb	whatever you think		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 it\'92s up to you	how then?											whatever you think; it\'92s up to you; how then?		< qayuq\super 2\nosupersub =mi		VK		qayughmi	qayughmi	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \
qayughquta	2fqb52enf	food to be added to other food to make the meal 		qawaagtani palaghyagulluki qayughqutkaghqameng alla qawaagyaamalghii \'91he felt he didn\'92t have birds he caught for a meal, so he went out and got some more\'92; ugkemun qayughqutkaghqaghniighaqunga \'91I am looking for food to add to our meal\'92													food to be added to other food to make the meal		< qayuq\super 1\nosupersub -ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -(u)ta		CK A & W 87		qayughquta	qayughquta	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
qayugtugh-	2f/[ne4-	strike repeatedly with an adze															to repeatedly strike with an adze		< qayug-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				qayugtugh-	qayugtugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qayugun	2f/uey	adze															adze		< qayug-(u)n				qayugun	qayugun	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
qayungllaasiq	2f/3k]9cb2	tea kettle			kettle (tea ~)												tea kettle		< qayuq\super 1\nosupersub -ngllagh-(u)siq				qayungllasiq	qayungllxsiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \

\f1\b qayuq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2f/2\'a1	tea		qayungllaghnaqunga \'91I am making a hot beverage\'92	broth	beverage, hot											tea; broth; hot beverage		PE qayu3				qayuq1	qayuq1	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1179 1\

\f1\b qayuq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2f/2\'99	how		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  qayuq elpek? \'91how are you?\'92; qayughmi \'91however you think; it\'92s up to you\'92													how						qayuq2	qayuq2	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1179 2\
qayuqaawi-	2f/261b-	harm (cause ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)													
\f0\i0 to cause harm	ghbxbyznm eoth,	from Chukchi ?	x	CK V & E 184 Rub 263		qayuqawi-	qayuqxwi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1179 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\
qayuqsaaq	2f/2c92	broth (frozen meat ~)			broth (little bit of ~)												frozen meat broth; little bit of broth		< qayuq-?-				qayuqsaq	qayuqsxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
qayuusiq	2f0cb2	cup															cup		< qayugh-(u)siq				qayusiq	qayxsiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qayuutaghraak	2f0nf4h6r	washtub		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 trough												washtub; trough	rjhsnj	< qayuutaq-raak		Rub. 263		qayutaghrak	qayxtaghrxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
qayuutaq	2f0nf2	tray, wooden, for cutting meat or for eating		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qayug-, qayuq\super 1													\nosupersub wooden tray for cutting meat or for eating						qayutaq	qayxtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Qayuutaq	@f0nf2	mountain near the end of the Kukulget Mountains near Savoonga		
\f2\i so called because its top resembles a tray													
\f0\i0 mountain near the end of the Kukulget Mountains near Savoonga						Qayutaq	Qayxtaq	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Qayuutaq	@f0nf2	Imtuk (lake in Chukotka between ~ lagoon and Sireniki)		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Sireniki (lake in Chukotka between Imtuk lagoon and ~)												lake in Chukotka between Imtuk lagoon and Sireniki				Men. 1972, 1975		qayutaq	qayxtaq	\uc0\u1178 \u1072 \u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qayvighagh-	2fqdb4f4-	almost reach the top or surface		sivuyagtem aghveq samanlluku aghvequmaa qayvighaghyan \'91the striker struck the whale while it was under water when it was about to surface\'92; qayvighansagulluku uyavanteghngaan naghullgumakanga \'91he felt that is was very close to the surface, so he threw the harpoon at it\'92													to almost reach the top or surface		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -?-		CK A & W 87		qayvighagh-	qayvighagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qayvighqe-	2fqdb52s-	reveal a secret suddenly		aghivallghiik elngaatall qayvighqutaqeftuk \'91the two people who were argueing were bursting out with each other\'92s secrets\'92; aksaqumtaaq qenwat qayvighqaat \'91they finally let out the secret\'92													to suddenly reveal a secret		< qaya\super e\nosupersub -?-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -		CK A & W 87		qayvighqe-	qayvighqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qayvighte-	2fqdb5ns-	mention			reveal								check; literally \'91to bring to surface\'92 ?				to mention; to reveal	egjvbyfnm rjuj-xnj-kb,j. j,yfhe;bdfnm rjuj-xnj-k>. hfpj,kfxfnm rjuj-k>	< qaya\super e\nosupersub -?-te\super \'a3\nosupersub -		Rub. 243; VK\'92s notes		qayvighte-	qayvighte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1074 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qaywa	2fq1f	wait!		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 qaywa taginaqaat? \'91are you sure they are coming?\'92; qaywa mekestaaghhaghngaan tuunakevnga taagken neghsameng \'91even though there isn't much you may still give me some of that seal meat\'92; Nanevgaghhaqlu aghnaghlqwaaghllaklu aangghumalghiik, "
\f2\i Qaywa qaywa
\f0\i0  aglaghnaqukung!" \'91The old man and the old woman assented, \'93
\f2\i Yes, okay
\f0\i0 , we\'92ll go!\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 37)	yes, okay then	at least								really?			wait!; consider before proceeding!; at least; really?; yes, okay then; is that so?		from Chukchi qaywe \'91yes, indeed, truly, really\'92				qaywa	qaywa	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1265 \u1072 \
qaywaam	2fq16v	certainly		
\f2\i particle, can be used in praise or in sarcasm;
\f0\i0  qaywaam tuunegpenaan qinunaghtuq \'91surely you shouldn't give him any -- he's such a trouble maker\'92 	surely												certainly; surely		< qaywa=am				qaywam	qaywxm	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \u1084 \
qaywaangam	2fq163fv	certainly (most ~)		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 enough (that\'92s ~)												most certainly; that's enough		< qaywa-?=ngam				qaywangam	qaywxngam	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
qaywalleqa	2fq1fk]s2f	now I see!		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0   
\f2\i may convey sarcasm; 
\f0\i0 qaywalleqa tamaaken pilgulghiiten akugaaq aaptaataghyamken avangituten \'91so that\'92s how it is, you do have that kind also, though when I asked you the other day you didn't\'92	so that\'92s how it is!												now I see!; so that's how it is!		< qaywa=lleqa				qaywalleqa	qaywalleqa	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \
qazigyaghaq*	2fpbumz4f2	yearling spotted seal			spotted seal, yearling	
\f2\i Phoca largha 
\f0\i0 (spotted seal) yearling											yearling spotted seal 
\f2\i (Phoca largha)		
\f0\i0 < qazigyaq-ghaq				qazigyaghaq*	qazigyaghaq*	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qazigyaq	2fpbumz2	spotted seal		Kamengllaghaqegkangit neghsapiget. 
\f2\i Qazigyameng
\f0\i0  melqulighluku yuget ipigtuluku\'85. \'91They made (hunting) skin-boots from ringed seal (skin). People put 
\f2\i spotted seal
\f0\i0  (skin) on the boot legs\'85.\'92 SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)	seal, spotted	
\f2\i Phoca largha											
\f0\i0 spotted seal
\f2\i  (Phoca largha)		
\f0\i0 PE qa9i!ya3				qazigyaq	qazigyaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
qefliqe-	2sak]b2s-	angry (be ~ (of a man))		
\f2\i applies to men only, for women's anger see
\f0\i0  agniqe-; qefliquq \'91he is angry\'92 / qefliqutaa \'91he is angry at him, is expressing his anger at him\'92; qefliqem angtalanganeng gginaa kavighqwaaghllagumakanga naqam sameng pigpenani, enkaam ellingit tunuquusimalghiit \'91because of his terrible anger his face turned red, but since he didn't say anything they turned their backs on him\'92	furious (be ~ (of a man))	mad (be ~ (of a man))											to be mad, angry or furious (of a man)		PE q0v0(t)-				qefliqe-	qefliqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qefliqsuug-	2sak]b2c0u-	angry (be slightly ~ (of a man))			frustrated (be slightly ~ (of a man))												to be slightly angry or frustrated (of a man)		< qefliqe-?-		VK		qefliqsug-	qefliqsxg-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1075 -\
qefteq	2sans2	Canada goose			goose, Canada	
\f2\i Branta canadensis											
\f0\i0 Canada goose (Branta canadensis)						qefteq	qefteq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \
qeghaate-	2s46ns-	store food on a meat rack in winter															to store food on a meat rack in winter		< qeghagh-(u)te-				qeghate-	qeghxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qeghagh-	2s4f4-	put up a meat rack or put meat on a rack															to put up a meat rack or put meat on a rack						qeghagh-	qeghagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qeghaghpak	2s4f5gfr	whale rib pole		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 whale rib used as a pole		< qeghaq-ghpak		CK Rub 288		qeghaghpak	qeghaghpak	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
qeghaq	2s4f2	meat rack		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  qeghat, 
\f2\i for one rack; 
\f0\i0 Aatkaghten taakut aalluki aani, ingavek qeghat asingitnun utaqiiyaghtaa tuqlughlleqamken. \'91Go out after you put on those clothes of yours, and go over there under the meat rack to wait; I\'92ll call you.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:18)	rack (meat ~)												meat rack		PE 0k03a3 (under PE 0k03a3-)				qeghaq	qeghaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qeghighin	2s4b4by	edging of white leather around sole of skin-boot		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 welt of white leather around sole of skin-boot												edging or welt of white leather around sole of skin-boot		< qeghiq-?-(u)n		CK Rub 288		qeghighin	qeghighin	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \
qeghilek	2s4bksr	jug		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 jug		< qeghiq-lek		CK Rub 289		qeghilek	qeghilek	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
qeghiq	2s4b2	lip 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 lip		PE qaqlu! (?)		CK Rub 289		qeghiq	qeghiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1179 \
qelaate-	2sk9ns-	take up one\'92s time		qelaannaquq amiiqaq niightughaghsaqumteggu \'91the walrus skin is going to take a while [to work on], so we should stretch it on the drying rack\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qelanegh-	slow (be ~ (or slower than hoped or expected))												to take up one\'92s time; to be slow (or slower than hoped or expected)				CK A & W 87		qelate-	qelxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b qelagh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2skz4-\super \'a1	\nosupersub shoo dogs away		qikmini qelaghii \'91he urged his dogs on\'92, 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he shooed his dogs away\'92; qikmiq neqneng neghiilghii qelaghaa \'91she shooed away the dog that was eating their food.\'92 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qelegh-	urge dogs on when driving a team												to urge dogs on when driving a team; to shoo dogs away		PE qela-\super 1				\nosupersub qelagh-1	qelagh-1	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub qelagh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2skz4-\super \'99	\nosupersub call out a greeting to someone coming to the door		qelaamalghii iteghmeng nagaquulluni \'91he shouted out a greeting upon hearing someone coming in\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qelegh-													to call out a greeting to someone coming to the door		PE qela-\super 1				\nosupersub qelagh-2	qelagh-2	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub qelanegh-	2skzys4-	long for 		tengegkayugneng qelaneghluni nulughyaghtuq \'91he became impatient waiting for the plane and went fishing\'92; Kaspik suupeliightuutkelluku sumeghtaghamalghii 
\f2\i qelanghumaghmi
\f0\i0  apangita ungipaghaalleghqaaneng\'85. \'91The entire time as Kaspik ate his stew he 
\f2\i impatiently and with longing
\f0\i0  thought about the story his grandfather would tell\'85.\'92 (KALLAG. 76)	await with impatience												to long for; to await with impatience. 		PE q0lan03(a3)- (under PE q0la-\super 1\nosupersub )				qelanegh-	qelanegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 -\
qelanqe-	2skzy2s-	await with impatience or longing		
\f2\i Qelanqumakanga
\f0\i0  igaghvigraaghaghmun igaghyalleghqani. \'91He 
\f2\i could hardly wait 
\f0\i0 to go to school in that new school house.\'92 (SULUWET 7)													to await with impatience or longing		< qelanegh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				qelanqe-	qelanqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1085 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qelegh-	2sks4-	urge		qelghaa \'91he urged him to do something\'92 / qelghaa qikmit neghqesqelluki \'91he urged him to feed the dogs\'92; qelghutaa \'91he urged that something be done concerning it\'92; nanevgam qelghutii aallghit angyat unitefqiita pisqelluki anuqataghaatanganeng \'91the old man encouraged them to make sure not to leave their partners' boat on account of the windy weather\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qelagh-	encourage	advise								coax			to urge; to encourage; to advise; to coax		PE qela-\super 1				\nosupersub qelegh-	qelegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
qelegi	2sksub	it turns out that		
\f2\i particle; Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0 qelegi ellnga aqnighaqeftuq \'91it turns out that he was hurting\'92; 
\f2\i may be used with expressive gemination of
\f0\i0  g	however	in the meantime											it turns out that; however; in the meantime		from Chukchi q0tl0!i \'91but in fact\'92				qelegi	qelegi	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \
qeleqetaagh-	2sks2sn64-	tickle		qeleqetaaghaa \'91he is tickling her\'92 / qeleqetaaghutuk \'91they two are tickling each other\'92; = ighileqitaagh-													to tickle		PY-S qal0q0-				qeleqetagh-	qeleqetxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
qelghwaagh-	2sk4164-	urge repeatedly															to repeatedly urge		< qelegh-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -				qelghwagh-	qelghwxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
qellayeg-	2sk]zqsu-	surgery (have ~)															to have surgery		cf. PY q0l0&@ak (under PE q0l0!- and q0lu!-)				qellayeg-	qellayeg-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1253 \u1099 \u1075 -\
qellayek	2sk]zqsr	scar with overgrowth of tissue															scar with overgrowth of tissue		cf. PY q0l0&@ak (under PE q0l0!- and q0lu!-)				qellayek	qellayek	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1253 \u1099 \u1082 \
qellefkaghte-	2sk]sarf5ns-	parboil		maklagmeng qellefkaghlluku neghuusimalghiit \'91they parboiled bearded seal meat and ate it\'92; ilangi neqem qellefkaghlluki neghaqiit \'91they parboil other foods and eat them\'92													to parboil		cf. PE q0l0!- and q0lu!- \'91get scorched or wrinkled\'92		CK A & W 88		qellefkaghte-	qellefkaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qelleghyak	2sk]s4mzr	sound of waves in lake or of moving between layers of ice															sound of waves in lake or of moving between layers of ice				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 158		qelleghyak	qelleghyak	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
qellemghaari-	2sk]sv46hb-	stunted (be ~ in one\'92s growth and development)		qikmighaq neghepanghitem qenwat qellemghaariiq \'91the puppy\'92s growth is stunted because it didn\'92t eat much\'92; amsakelghiimeng qellemghaarikameng unangumalghii \'91he caught a small seal that was stunted in growth\'92													to be stunted in one\'92s growth and development				CK A & W 88		qellemghari-	qellemghxri-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1084 \u1271 \u257 \u1088 \u1080 -\
qellepegraq	2sk]sgsuhf2	membrane of bearded seal intestine or walrus heart															membrane of bearded seal intestine or walrus heart				VK for walrus heart membrane		qellepegraq	qellepegraq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
qellghaghqe-	2sk]5f52s-	influence to act in a certain way		paqumiyulghiit angyamun ilangita kequuluteng qellghaghqiit \'91they hesitated to go boating, but the others influenced them when they went\'92; qellghaghqiiluteng ellngit taglaghtut \'91they influenced others to go, but they went back to land\'92													to influence to act in a certain way				CK A & W 88		qellghaghqe-	qellghaghqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qellghaghqi-	2sk]5f52b-	influence others to act			stir up others to get them to act in a certain way												to influence others to act; to stir up others to get them to act in a certain way				VK		qellghaghqi-	qellghaghqi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 -\
qelli-	2sk]b-	packed down (get ~ from pressure)		qelliiq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qellii \'91it got packed down\'92 / qellisighhu nuna naghaaghvigkaaluku qellikan \'91allow time for that ground to get packed down for playground use\'92; qellisameng saagsaqameng akuutameng cookies-engllameng ikuutaqut \'91cookie shapes are cut out of flattened and spread-out dough\'92													to get packed down from pressure						qelli-	qelli-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
qellineq	2sk]bys2	athletic (site for ~ or similar physical activity)		
\f2\i there was a specific site termed thus in Gambell	
\f0\i0 playground												site for athletic or similar physical activity; playground		< qelli-neq\super 2				\nosupersub qellineq	qellineq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qelliqa	2sk]b2f\super s	\nosupersub pack ice		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qelliqek,
\f2\i  for one such ice field	
\f0\i0 ice field, floating												pack ice; floating ice field				CK Rub 289		qelliqa	qelliqa	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1099 \
qellisagh-	2sk]bcz4-	flatten		= qelliste-													to flatten		< qelli-sagh-				qellisagh-,	qellisagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
qelliste-	2sk]bcns-	flatten		= qellisagh-													to flatten		qelli-(te)ste-				qelliste-	qelliste-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qellu	2sk]/	colon															colon		PE 0qlu				qellu	qellu	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
qellughqaan	2sk]/526y	rope used for gymnastics		
\f2\i also 
\f0\i0 qellughqaan; 
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qellughqaatek
\f2\i , for one such rope													
\f0\i0 rope used for gymnastics		< qellughqagh-(u)n				qellughqan	qellughqxn	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u257 \u1085 \
qellughqagh-	2sk]/52f4-	gymnastics (do ~ on a rope stretched between posts)															to do gymnastics on a rope stretched between posts						qellughqagh-	qellughqagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qellughte-	2sk]/5ns-	shrink		qellughtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qellughtaa \'91it shrank\'92 / qellughtestaa \'91he shrank it, let it shrink\'92													to shrink		PY qe@u3t0- under PE 0q0-\super 1\nosupersub )				qellughte-	qellughte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qelluughwagh-	2sk]041f4-	excrement (have ~ stuck to one (of a dog usually))		qikmiq tapghaghmeng neghluni qelluughwaamalghii \'91the dog ate a thong and its excrement got stuck\'92													to have excrement stuck to one (of a dog usually)						qellughwagh-	qellxghwagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qelmegh-	2skvs4-	shimmer		qelmeghtuq \'91it is glittering, is shiny\'92 / qelmeqegtaq \'91glittery thing\'92; = evlegh-, qavlegh-, uvlegh-	glitter	shiney (be ~)											to shimmer; to glitter; to be shiny		PE q0vl03-				qelmegh-	qelmegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 -\
qelmeghsagh-	2skvs4cz4-	polish		qelmeghsaghaa ulimaaq \'91he polished the carving\'92													to polish		< qelmegh-sagh-				qelmeghsagh-	qelmeghsagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
qelmeghte-	2skvs5ns-	shiny (become ~)		qelmeghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qelmeghtaa \'91it became shiny\'92 /													to become shiny		< qelmegh-ghte-				qelmeghte-	qelmeghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qelmeghute-	2skvs4ens-	glitter															to glitter		< qelmegh-(u)te-				qelmeghute-	qelmeghute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qelmeghuute-	2skvs48ns-	flash		tengegkayugem qergesekek siqinghem qelmeghuutaak qiivyalghiimi \'91the plane\'92s window reflected the sun, as it turned\'92	reflect light												to flash; to reflect light		< qelmegh-?-				qelmeghute-	qelmeghxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qelmeqsaq	2skvs2cz2	shining or flashing spot on something															shining or flashing spot on something		< qelmegh-?-				qelmeqsaq	qelmeqsaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
qelpa	2sk]gf	branch, large, on lower part of reindeer antler		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 large branch on lower part of reindeer antler		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 290		qelpa	qelpa	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1072 \
qelpate-	2sk]gfns-	open (be ~)		qelpatuq \'91it is open, unlocked\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qelpeghte-	unlocked  (be ~)									 			to be open; to be unlocked						qelpate-	qelpate-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qelpegh-	2sk]gs4-	open		qelpeghtuq \'91it opened\'92 / Esghapagumaluku amik inga 
\f2\i qelpeghluni
\f0\i0 , yuuk aanumalghii. Amik 
\f2\i qelpeghngamaluku
\f0\i0  imaninguq sangwaa naaqaaluni neqnipiglleghhii aana. \'91While he was watching it that door 
\f2\i opened
\f0\i0  and a person went out. While the door 
\f2\i was open
\f0\i0  something emitting a delicious aroma came out.\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 2)													to open		PY q0@pa3-				qelpegh-	qelpegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 -\
qelpeghquusiq	2sk]gs528cb2	can opener			opener												can opener; opener of any sort		< qelpeghte-qugh-(u)siq				qelpeghqusiq	qelpeghqxsiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qelpeghte-	2sk]gs5ns-	open (it)		qelpeghtaa \'91he opened it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qelpate-	start (an activity)												to open (it); to start (an activity)		< qelpegh-te\super 1\nosupersub -				qelpeghte-	qelpeghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qelqe-	2sk]2s-	compel		Ii, 
\f2\i qelqangit
\f0\i0  legan tesamavek. \'91Then they made them go down there.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:2); \'85 
\f2\i qelqaat
\f0\i0  uyamigesqelluku Jesus-em qaquuraa. \'91\'85 they 
\f2\i compelled
\f0\i0  him to carry the cross of Jesus on his shoulders.\'92 (Matthew 27.32)	order												to compel; to order						qelqe-	qelqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qelqela-	2sk]2skf-	difficult (be ~)											check the exact form of the base				to be difficult	nhelyj			Rub. 290		qelqela-	qelqela-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1072 -\
qelu-	2sk/-	cramp (have a muscle ~)		ighumikun qeluuq \'91he has a cramp in his leg\'92; qelutaa he lashed it to something	taut (be ~)	muscle cramp (have a ~)											to have a muscle cramp; to be tied or fastened tightly; to be taut		PE q0lu-				qelu-	qelu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 -\
Qelughilghet	2sk/4bk4sn	clan (a particular ~)		
\f2\i singular is 
\f0\i0 Qelughileq													a particular clan				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 146		Qelughilghet	Qelughilghet	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \
qelughtaaq	2sk/5n62	sea ice (long strip of floating ~ or series of pieces of ice arrayed in a strip)		
\f2\i see item 52 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	strip of floating sea ice or series of pieces of ice arrayed in a strip												long strip of floating sea ice or series of pieces of ice arrayed in a strip		< qelu-?				qelughtaq	qelughtxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
qelulghute-	2skek4ens-	tie to secure it from slipping off		awavaghaatalghii takwavek qelulghutigu \'91since it is trying to get away, tie it to secure it\'92													to tie to secure it from slipping off				CK A & W 88		qelulghute-	qelulghute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qeluqite-	2ske2bns-	restrained by a leash or tether (be ~)		qikmim sughugyaghluku uyaatamikun qeluqituq \'91a dog chased him, but it stopped suddenly when it reached the end of its rope\'92	stop suddenly upon reaching the end of one\'92s rope												to be be restrained by a leash or tether; to stop suddenly upon reaching the end of one\'92s rope		< qelu-qite-				qeluqite-	qeluqite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qelutaq	2skenf2	fastener line		amik qelpeghaghhnayukan uninnaqngamigu qelutaa qillghusimakanga \'91in case the door might suddenly open, he secured it by tying it in place\'92; umeketaaq nefteggluku qelutii qilleghqughii nengtaqluki \'91he put the cover in place, and tied its fasteners stretching them tight\'92													fastener line		< qelute-aq		CK A & W 88		qelutaq	qelutaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qelute-	2sk/ns-	tie tightly		qelutaa \'91he fastened it to something\'92 /	fasten tightly	bind tightly											to tie, bind or otherwise fasten tightly		< qelu-te\super 1\nosupersub -				qelute-	qelute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qemak	2svfr	almost the same size		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  qemak akmagutaghpagestun angtaaq \'91it is almost as big as a large barrel\'92	approximately												almost the same size; approximately		from Chukchi q0mek \'91barely, almost\'92				qemak	qemak	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \
qemall	2svfk]	might happen		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  qemall angufqaghlleqaaten \'91you might get caught in the bad weather\'92; utaqiigaqut qemall taawa aliighaa \'91they waited so long and at last it cleared up\'92; waaknanighaqanka iiskughtekanka qemall kaatut \'91just when I forgot about looking out for them, they finally came\'92; qalingunang pikuvek eslallugughtekan qemall aghilleqaaten \'91if you go without your raincoat you might get wet if it rains\'92; Ii aghnalqwaaq 
\f2\i qemall
\f0\i0 , tukaasimaa neghegkaan entaqun, mighyam kaatkaqaa elngaatall, tesqawani taaqluni tuufqaghtaneghmeng.  \'91See, it 
\f2\i must be
\f0\i0  that what she ate made the old lady sick because an attack of vomiting came over her after she ate so quickly.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:6)	finally	at last								could be or must be			could be or must be; might happen; finally; at last		from Chukchi q0mel \'91but then, moreover\'92				qemall	qemall	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \
qemalngam	2svfk3fv	consequently		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 consequently		< qemall=ngam				qemalngam	qemalngam	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
qemeghyaq	2svs4mz2	eyelash															eyelash		PE q0m03ya3				qemeghyaq	qemeghyaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
qemi	2svb	tune		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 melody								check				tune; melody	vjnbd. yfgtd			Rub. 290		qemi	qemi	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1080 \
qemighlluk	2svb5k]/r	torso		panika qemighllugtuuq \'91my daughter has a long torso\'92													torso				VK		qemighlluk	qemighlluk	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
Qemighpak	@svb5gfr	hill with VABM \'93Rock\'94 on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 hill with VABM \'93Rock\'94 on St. Lawrence Is.						Qemighpak	Qemighpak	\uc0\u1178 \u1099 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \

\f1\b qemighqe-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2svb52s-\'a1	split a frozen fish lengthwise		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf.
\f0\i0  qemite-									check; cf. qemite- \'91to hang by the neck\'92 -- connection?				to split a frozen fish lengthwise	hfp,bdfnm gjgjkfv dljkm vjhj;tye/ hs,e			Rub. 291		qemighqe-1	qemighqe-1	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub qemighqe-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2svb52s-\'99	stretch a rope tight and tie it securely		tevram qikmini qemighqelluki atghaghtuq \'91the hunter stretched and tied the towline of his dogteam and went towards the ocean\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qemite-													to stretch a rope tight and tie it securely				CK A & W 89		qemighqe-2	qemighqe-2	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub qemightu-	2svb5ne-	long (be ~)		qemightuqaq \'91long thing\'92; qemightuluku angyinaqniiquq qayughllagnguq angyaat qemighqestaaghhaq \'91he says he will make his boat long because their boat is not long enough\'92; qemightuqaq taana aghveghniighmun atuqaat \'91they used that long one for whale hunting\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qemiq													to be long				CK A & W 89		qemightu-	qemightu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 -\
qemiq	2svb2	hill with a long profile			mound, elongated	leadline or floatline of net								back, around spinal column			hill with a long profile; elongated mound; leadline or floatline of net; part of back around spinal column		PE q0mi3		gloss 4: CK Rub 290		qemiq	qemiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \
qemite-, qemiite-	2svbns-. 2sv7ns-	hang by the neck		qemituq \'91he hung himself; qemitaa he hung it (by the neck)\'92 / qemitutkaqa ilungighteqelghii panigminun tuqulghiimun \'91I feel all choked up about her grief over her daughter's death\'92	strangle	choked up (get ~ with sadness, fear, or grief)											to hang by the neck; to strangle; to get choked up with sadness, fear, or grief		PE qemit-				qemite-, qemite-	qemite-, qemxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -, \u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qemleghaghte-	2svks4f5ns-	slight spinning of one\'92s head (have a ~)			darkening in one\'92s eyes (have a ~)												to have slight spinning of one\'92s head; to have a darkening in one\'92s eyes	ckturf rhe;bncz ujkjdf\\ ntvyttn d ukfpf[			CK V & E 66, Rub 291		qemleghaghte-	qemleghaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qemqagh-	2sv2f4-	ask someone to do something with someone		qawaagyalgutnguluku ilani qemqaamakanga \'91he asked his friend to go as his partner in bird hunting\'92; qemqaghwaaghumayaqanga piyunghisimalghii \'91he repeatedly asked him, but he refused\'92													to ask someone to do something with someone				CK A & W 89 CK		qemqagh-	qemqagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qemtaaghrak	2svn64fr	rudder deckhouse		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 rudder place												rudder deckhouse; rudder place	hektdfz he,rf; vtcnj hektdjuj			CK V & E 107, Rub 291		qemtaghrak	qemtxghrak	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1082 \
qemtaq	2svnf2	attic		qemtamun mayuuqughaat saghllaaq \'91they took all the junk up to the attic\'92; qemtametuq qavaghvika \'91my bedroom is upstairs\'92	upper level, floor, or story of building												attic; upper level, floor, or story of building		PY q0mtaq				qemtaq	qemtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qemtigh-	2svnb4-	install a ceiling											looks good				to install a ceiling	yfcnbkfnm gjnjkjr	< qemtaq-ligh-		Rub. 291		qemtigh-	qemtigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\
Qenaaghaak	@sy646r	Kunaghak Creek on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kunaghak Creek on St. Lawrence Is.		< qenaaq-ghaq-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 Qenaghak	Qenxghxk	\uc0\u1178 \u1099 \u1085 \u257 \u1271 \u257 \u1082 \
qenaaghlluk	2sy65k]er	pebble-covered area		qenaaghlluk piyukaaluni meghnughnaghtuq \'91walking in pebbly areas is tiresome\'92; iwernga nunivagmeng qenaaghlluk pinilghii \'91however the pebbly ground is better than the tundra\'92													area covered by pebbles		< qenaaq-ghlluk		CK A & W 89		qenaghlluk	qenxghlluk	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u257 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1091 \u1082 \
qenaaghquute-	2sy6528ns-	rustling sound (make the ~ of walking on gravel or sand)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 given with short a; check				to make the rustling sound of walking on gravel or sand	iehifnm gj gtcre	< qenaaq-?-uute-		Rub. 291		qenaghqute-	qenxghqxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qenaaq	2sy62	sand, grainy			gravel												grainy sand; gravel						qenaq	qenxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
qenaavzeghaq	2sy6dps4f2	sand, fine															fine sand		< qenaaq-vzeghaq				qenavzeghaq	qenxvzeghaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u257 \u1074 \u1079 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qeneghte-	2sys5ns-	slighted (feel and say that one has been ~)		qeneghtuq \'91he feels slighted\'92 / qenghutkaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qeneghtutkaa \'91he feels slighted over it\'92													to feel and say that one has been slighted		PE q0n03-				qeneghte-	qeneghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qengaghsuki-	2s3f5c/rb-	snort (of animals)		qengaghsukiiq \'91it snorted\'92 /													to snort (of animals)		< qengaq-?-				qengaghsuki-	qengaghsuki-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1080 -\
qengaghuk	2s3f4er	snowdrift		
\f2\i literally: 
\f0\i0 'big nose'													snowdrift		PY-S q0&a3$uk (under PE q0&a3); < qengaq-?				qengaghuk	qengaghuk	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \
qengalegtaq	2s3fks[nf2	bearded seal, large		= qengalek\super 2	
\f2\i \nosupersub Erignathus barbatus 
\f0\i0 (bearded seal) large												large bearded seal 
\f2\i (Erignathus barbatus) 
\f0\i0 of some sort		< qengaq-?-				qengalegtaq	qengalegtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b qengalek\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2s3fksr\'a1	king eider			eider, king	
\f2\i Somateria spectabilis											
\f0\i0 king eider
\f2\i  (Somateria spectabilis)		
\f0\i0 PE q0&al0! (under PE q)&a3); < qengaq-lek				qengalek1	qengalek1	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 1\

\f1\b qengalek\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2s3fksr\super \'99	\nosupersub bearded seal, large		= qengalegtaq	
\f2\i Erignathus barbatus 
\f0\i0 (bearded seal) large												large bearded seal 
\f2\i (Erignathus barbatus) 
\f0\i0 of some sort		qengaq-lek				qengalek2	qengalek2	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 2\
qengallegtaq	2s3fk]s[nf2	elephant seal, northern		
\f2\i not normally found in the Yupik area	
\f0\i0 seal (northern elephant ~)	
\f2\i Mirounga angustirostris											
\f0\i0 northern elephant seal 
\f2\i (Mirounga angustirostris)				
\f0\i0 SLI Cur. Res. Man. 60		qengallegtaq	qengallegtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qengaq	2s3f2	nose		
\f2\i used in the dual for one person\'92s or animal\'92s nose:
\f0\i0  qengakek \'91his or its nose\'92													nose		PE q0&a3				qengaq	qengaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \
qengaqegtagh-	2s3f2s[nf4-	smell (have a good sense of ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to have a good sense of smell	j,kflf/obq [jhjibv j,jyzybtv. xenmtv	< qengaq-kegtaq		Rub. 292		qengaqegtagh-	qengaqegtagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qengesquq	2s3sc2e2	limpet															limpet		< qengaq-squq				qengesquq	qengesquq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
qenghaghtu	2sy4f5ne	blue fox			fox, blue	
\f2\i Vulpes fulva var.											
\f0\i0 blue fox (Vulpes fulva var.)		PE qi3n03 or PI qian3aqtuq				qenghaghtu	qenghaghtu	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \
qenghuk	2sy4er	refrozen crushed sea ice		
\f2\i see item 53 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice (refrozen crushed ~)												refrozen crushed sea ice						qenghuk	qenghuk	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \
Qenipagilghat	@sybgfubk4fn	Kinipaghulghat Mtns. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kinipaghulghat Mtns. on St. Lawrence Is.		< ?-lghaq-
\f2\i plural 
\f0\i0 (?)				Qenipagilghat	Qenipagilghat	\uc0\u1178 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1090 \
qenleghwaaq	2syks4162	beads (long string of ~ worn by women looped from shoulder to waist crossing in the front )															long string of beads worn by women looped from shoulder to waist crossing in the front 						qenleghwaq	qenleghwxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qenneghhaliigh-	2sy]s5fk74-	travel low in water (of a boat)		angyaghut qenneghhaliighluteng taglaghaqut \'91the boats are coming low in water\'92													to travel low in water (of a boat)				CK A & W 89		qenneghhaligh-	qenneghhalxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
qenneqegsagh-	2sy]s2s[cz4-	embrace firmly		qenneqegsaghaa \'91he squeezed her hard\'92; qenneqegsaghii iiggeni \'91he made a hard fist\'92; qenneqegsaataa \'91he made a hard fist at her\'92	hug firmly	squeeze firmly								fist (make a hard ~)			to embrace, hug, or squeeze firmly; to make a hard fist		< qete-?-				qenneqegsagh-	qenneqegsagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
qenngu	2sy3e	brow area															brow area		PE qen&a(3)				qenngu	qenngu	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1187 \u1091 \
qenngulliqe-	2sy3ek]b2s-	frown		qenngulliqutaanga ugumiyagullunga \'91he frowned angrily at me\'92; siqinghem qenngulliqestaanga \'91the sun made me squint\'92	squint												to frown; to squint		PE qen&u@iq0(t)- (under PE qen&u(3)); < qenngu-lliqe-				qenngulliqe-	qenngulliqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qenngumsak	2sy3evcfr	hill, small, on top of a larger hill		Qagupalgem qenngumsagani aruughtuq \'91he looked around on top of the small hill that is on top of Qagupalek\'92; neqesghii qenngumsagmelnguut ayghiisimakangi \'91they (foxes) became accustomed to bait that was on a small hill atop a larger hill\'92													small hill on top of a larger hill		< qenngu-?		CK A & W 89		qenngumsak	qenngumsak	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1072 \u1082 \

\f1\b qenu\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2sye\'a1	ice (thin layer of fine brash ~ that forms at the beginning of winter)		
\f2\i see item 54 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	brash ice (thin layer of fine ~ that forms at the beginning of winter)	slush ice, newly forming											thin layer of fine brash  ice that forms at the beginning of winter; newly forming slush ice		PE q0nu				qenu1	qenu1	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 1\

\f1\b qenu\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2sye\'99	girth			thickness of a more or less cylindrical thing												girth; thickness of a more or less cylindrical thing						qenu2	qenu2	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 2\
qenughhaghaq	2sye5f4f2	ice (early loose slush ~)		
\f2\i see item 56 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	slush ice, early loose												early loose slush ice		< qenu-ghhaq-ghaq				qenughhaghaq	qenughhaghaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qenulek	2syeksr	codfish type		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined; 
\f0\i0 = kenulek\super 2													\nosupersub type of codfish				CK Rub 291		qenulek	qenulek	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
qenungiitaq	2sye37nf2	scoop for removing brash ice															scoop for removing brash ice		< qenu-(ng)igh-(u)taq				qenungitaq	qenungxtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qenutu-	2syene-	thick (be too ~)		qenutuuq \'91it is thick\'92 /													to be thick		< qenu\super 2\nosupersub -tu-				qenutu-	qenutu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 -\
qenwaaq	2sy162	\'93master of the mountain winds\'94		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 \'93master of the mountain winds\'94				CK Rub 292		qenwaq	qenwxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qenwat	2sy1fn	finally		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  qenwat naangutaaten utaqiinginaamaluta \'91finally after waiting they are leaving nothing for you\'92; qenwatlu pikenguten tamaaken \'91you finally got one of them too\'92; iniighet qenwat aghii ikughtestegpenateng \'91the clothes on the line are getting wet since they haven't been taken down\'92; Muluteghllagluku aaptaqsaqanga aghnangnaqunnaluku. Ighsaaqelghii, avelghaqiinaghaqegkanga. 
\f2\i Qenwat
\f0\i0  atanga sumeghtaghaghllagluninguq aghtughluku nulightiisqenneghmeng, pimakanga, \'93Sameng nulightughnaluten pizin?\'94 \'91For a long time, he had been asking him to get a woman for him to marry. He would resent it, leaving him alone. 
\f2\i Finally
\f0\i0  his father thought very hard after having a hard time trying to get him to get married, he said to him, \'93What do you think you will marry?\'94\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. II:21); Tawani aqfaquullghiit nulaghllaneghmeggni sukaaghsimaghmeng lliighaqut.  Paghyulghii tunuvaamaghmi, 
\f2\i qenwat
\f0\i0  qafsin\'92ggaaghtaqut. \'91Those running, when they become so many, they go faster. Those who wear out back down, 
\f2\i then
\f0\i0  they become very few.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:48)	understandable (as an ~ result of what has come before)	pretty soon								then			finally; as an understandable result of what has come before; pretty soon; then		from Chukchi q0nwer \'91finally, at last\'92				qenwat	qenwat	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1085 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \
qepe-	2sgs-	tie around		
\f2\i for example, to tie a cord around a bag to close its opening;
\f0\i0  qepaa \'91he tied it\'92 / Kalngagam ukimallgha 
\f2\i qepluku
\f0\i0  imighaqa. \'91After I 
\f2\i tied up
\f0\i0  the hole in the bag I filled it.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 141)	strap as with tape												to tie around; to strap as with tape		PY-S q0p0- and q0pa!- (under PE 0q0-\super 1\nosupersub )				qepe-	qepe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 -\
qeperghuugh-	2sgsh484-	decorate front of sealskin water boots with narrow strips of bleached sealskin with waterproof seams		= quperghuugh-													to decorate front of sealskin water boots with narrow strips of bleached sealskin with waterproof seams		< qupe-?-				qeperghugh-	qeperghxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1271 \u1263 \u1271 -\
qepesegaq	2sgscsuf2	package, small, tied securely															small package tied securely		< qepe-?-				qepesegaq	qepesegaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
qepghagh-	2sg5f4-	work		qepghaghtuq \'91he worked\'92; qepghaghaa \'91he worked on it\'92 / Mangteghat aliighluki kaatii, kaalluni mangteghamun qineghsalghiimi aghnaq qama 
\f2\i qepghaghaqeftuq
\f0\i0  nateghmi. \'91The houses appeared, and she went to them, and when she got there and looked into a house there was a woman 
\f2\i working
\f0\i0  in the outer room.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:206)													to work						qepghagh-	qepghagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qepghaqaq	2sg5f2f2	work			job	employment											work; job; employment		< qepghagh-kaq				qepghaqaq	qepghaqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
qepghaqiisak	2sg5f27czr	unemployment															unemployment		< qepghaqaq-(ng)isag-				qepghaqisak	qepghaqxsak	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
qepghaqiisek	2sg5f27csr	idle person			bored person												idle or bored person		< -qepghagh-?-				qepghaqisek	qepghaqxsek	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \

\f1\b qepneq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2sgy]s2\super \'a1	\nosupersub bundle			standard amount of items such as furs used in trade												bundle; standard amount of items such as furs used in trade		< qepe-neq\super 2				\nosupersub qepneq1	qepneq1	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 1\

\f1\b qepneq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2sgy]s2\super \'99	\nosupersub herring		
\f2\i Chotkotkan (R); question; maybe should be
\f0\i0  qupneq \'91whitefish\'92 									check; we have qupneq \'91whitefish\'92 -- is this a variant, error, or what? 				herring	ctklm			Rub. 293		qepneq2	qepneq2	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 2\
Qepsukak	@sgc/rfr	narrows in Koozata River on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 narrows in Koozata River on St. Lawrence Is.		< qepsukaq-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 Qepsukak	Qepsukak	\uc0\u1178 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \
qepsukaq	2sgc/rf2	point of land which defines a strait or narrows together with a point on the opposite shore															point of land which defines a strait or narrows together with a point on the opposite shore		< qepe-				qepsukaq	qepsukaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
qeputaq	2sgenf2	string			cord	rope											string; cord; rope		< qepe-(u)taq				qeputaq	qeputaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qepute-	2sgens-	tie up or tie together		qeputaa eslegelghii tapghaq \'91he tied a stout rope around something\'92	lash (tie)												to tie up or tie together; to lash		< qepe-(u)te-				qepute-	qepute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qera	2shf	whale skin 
\f2\i (mangtak),
\f0\i0  aged		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 aged whale skin
\f2\i  (mangtak)		
\f0\i0 cf. PE q0ca3u(C)a3		CK Rub 294		qera	qera	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \
qerenga	2shs3f	reindeer (large old ~ (in folktales))		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  quyngiq													large old reindeer (in folktales)		from Chukchi qora&0 \'91reindeer\'92	04, 14			qerenga	qerenga	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \
qergesae	2shusczs	window		
\f2\i also dual,
\f0\i0  qergesek, 
\f2\i for one window;
\f0\i0   qergesngi 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qergesengi \'91its windows\'92; = qirgesa													window		from Chukchi qer!0c0n \'91opening for letting light in, window\'92	14			qergesae	qergesae	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1099 \
qergu	2shue	pine, dwarf Siberian		
\f2\i Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0 = qurgu	dwarf Siberian pine	
\f2\i Pinus cembra							
\f0\i0 check exact species				dwarf Siberian pine (
\f2\i Pinus cembra)		
\f0\i0 from Chukchi q0r!oq0r, pl. q0r!ot \'91dwarf Siberian pine\'92	07, 14			qergu	qergu	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1075 \u1091 \
qerng-	2sh3-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > qerngagh-, qerngayaak, qerngughte-. qernguqu																			qerng-	qerng-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 -\
qerngagh-	2sh3f4-	together		
\f2\i used in the quantifier/qualifier construction;
\f0\i0  qerngaghmeng \'91they together\'92; qerngamta \'91we, or us, together\'92													together		< qerng-?-				qerngagh-	qerngagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qerngayaak	2sh3f9r	field of broken sea ice pieces bunched together		
\f2\i see item 55 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												field of broken sea ice pieces bunched together		< qerng-?-				qerngayak	qerngayxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
qerngughqugh-	2sh3e52e4-	gather things by repeated actions		qerngughqughii yuni \'91he gathered his crew together\'92; qerngughquutiiq tukfightuusaghqameng \'91he gathered some valuables to make a payment to his future inlaws (a traditional practice of a husband-to-be)\'92													to gather things by repeated actions		< qerngughte-qugh-				qerngughqugh-	qerngughqugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qerngughte-	2sh3e5ns-	gather		qerngughtut \'91they gathered\'92; qerngughpagtaatut nagaquulluteng mengwaaghmeng taagegken \'91they quickly gathered in groups when they heard a noise that sounded sort of human in the distance\'92	assemble	collect											to gather; to assemble; to collect		< qerng-?-				qerngughte-	qerngughte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qernguqu	2sh3e2e	birds flying together		
\f2\i plural,
\f0\i0  qernguqut, 
\f2\i used; 
\f0\i0 sukilpaat qernguqut aagyata guusaqminiki ifkaghqughtaagii \'91he shot at a flock of auklets as they were flying by and caught quite a few of them\'92													birds flying together		< qerng-?		CK A & W 89		qernguqu	qernguqu	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \
qerrute-	2siens-	gather at a certain place		angyat sikum taan\'92ga qerrutii \'91the ice is gathering around the boat out there\'92; nuyaa iglagutem qerruteghllagumalghii \'91her hair was all at one spot because it was tangled\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qerng-	mat or tangle (of hair or fur)												to gather at a certain place; to mat or tangle (of hair or fur)		< qerte-(u)te-		CK A & W 90		qerrute-	qerrute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1096 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qerta	2sinf	matted tangled hair or fur		qertangi mesuunii \'91she combed out his tangled clusters of hair\'92; = qarta; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qalta													matted tangled hair or fur		PY-S qalt0				qerta	qerta	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1096 \u1090 \u1072 \
qertaaghneq	2sin64ys2	large group of things, people or animals		
\f2\i plural,
\f0\i0  qertaaghneghet, 
\f2\i used;
\f0\i0  uupat qertaaghneghet qaakumakangi \'91he pulled up a large group of sea-peaches\'92;
\f2\i  cf. 
\f0\i0 qerng-													large group of things, people or animals				CK A & W 90		qertaghneq	qertxghneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1096 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qerte-	2sins-	mat or tangle (of hair or fur)		qikmim melqwa qertaa \'91the dog\'92s fur is getting matted\'92													to mat or tangle (of hair or fur)						qerte-	qerte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1096 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qesemna	2scsvyf	whetstone		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  = qisemna	rock used as whetstone	sharpening stone							check; what is the source of this word? it sounds like Chukchi, but I can\'92t find it -- I feel like I\'92ve seen it somewhere before				whetstone; rock used as whetstone; sharpening stone	njxbkj	from Chukchi ?	x	Rub. 273		qesemna	qesemna	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \

\f1\b qesigh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2scb4-\'a1	spit		qesightuq \'91he spit\'92; qesighaa \'91he spit at him\'92 /													to spit		PE q0ci3(-)				qesigh-1	qesigh-1	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub qesigh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2scb4-\'99	sweat		qesightuq \'91he sweated\'92/	perspire	condensation (collect ~)											to sweat; to perspire; to collect condensation						qesigh-2	qesigh-2	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub qesighneq	2scb4ys2	condensation		sangigtaa suflugragem qesighnegha \'91she wiped the condensation from the pipes\'92	perspiration												condensation; perspiration		< qesigh\super 2\nosupersub -neq\super 2				\nosupersub qesighneq	qesighneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qesiighaq	2sc74f2	drizzle		qesiighaq seghleghllaguuq taawa \'91it\'92s drizzling so hard!\'92; qesiighaaghtuq \'91it began to drizzle\'92													drizzle						qesighaq	qesxghaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qesiighavleghaq	2sc74fdks4f2	mist															mist		< qesiighaq-vleghaq		VK		qesighavleghaq	qesxghavleghaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qesiite-	2sc7ns-	spit out liquid		qesiituq \'91he spit out something\'92, \'91he spit blood\'92; qesiitaa \'91he spit it out\'92 /	spit blood												to spit out liquid; to spit blood		< qesigh\super 1\nosupersub -(u)te-				qesite-	qesxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qesilleq	2scbk]s2	spittle															spittle		< qesigh\super 1\nosupersub -lleq				qesilleq	qesilleq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
qesiqun, qesikqun	2scb2ey. 2scbr2ey	on the contrary		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  qesikqun pininghilnguq \'91but, he isn't well\'92; utaqaaqaqa qesikqun aghulaqumalghii \'91I've been waiting for him, but all this time he\'92d already left\'92; Apayepayiighenkuk melngunkuk uzivumakangat naayghaq. 
\f2\i Qesiqun
\f0\i0  paallghunkuk qetngalleghyankuk uyghalqusighhaq uzivumakangat. \'91The spider and the beetle went around the mountain. 
\f2\i It turned out however that 
\f0\i0  the white bug and the grasshopper went around a boulder. (They were supposed to be racing on the same course.)\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 56)	but												on the contrary; but		from Chukchi qesiqun \'91not certainly so\'92				qesiqun, qesikqun	qesiqun, qesikqun	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 , \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
qesni	2scy]b	walrus breast, female, with meat to be eaten															female walrus breast with meat to be eaten				CK Rub 296 CK		qesni	qesni	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 \
qesqesawi-	2sc2scf1b-	stay forever			stop resisting	surrender											to stay forever; to stop resisting; to surrender	jcnfncz yfdctulf	from Chukchi q0sq0sew0k \'91stay, get stuck\'92		CK V & E 170; 180 on gloss 2 & 3, Rub 295		qesqesawi-	qesqesawi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1072 \u1265 \u1080 -\

\f1\b qesug-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2sc/u-\'a1	pull up and out		qesugii veget \'91he pulled out the grass\'92; qesugnaqutkesaghaa qiipam iquga \'91she tried to pull off the end of the thread that was hanging out\'92	yank out												to pull up and out; to yank out		PE q0c(c)u!-				qesug-1	qesug-1	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub qesug-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2sc/u-\'99	happy		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  qesugnaghtuq \'91it makes one happy and excited; it is enjoyable\'92; ayumiq qesugnaghyalghii angyaghpinneq \'91in times past it used to be very exciting when the ships came\'92; qesugyugtuq \'91he's happy and excited\'92	excited	enjoying											happy; excited; enjoying						qesug-2	qesug-2	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\super 2\
\nosupersub qesuga-	2sceuf-	cramps (have ~ from intestinal gas)		aqsaka qesugaghllaguuq \'91I am having stomach cramps\'92													to have cramps from intestinal gas		< qecug-?-		CK A & W 90		qesuga-	qesuga-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 -\
qesugniqe-	2sc/uyb2s-	excited (be very ~)		Qavaghninghitunga 
\f2\i qesugniqem
\f0\i0  Ungaziq esghaghnaqegkegka. \'91I wasn\'92t sleepy on account of my 
\f2\i anticipating the pleasure 
\f0\i0 of seeing Chaplino.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:186)	elated (be ~)	anticipate enjoyment											to be very excited; to be elated; to anticipate enjoyment		< qesug-naq-liqe-				qesugniqe-	qesugniqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qesugragh-	2sc/uhf4-	pull out repeatedly or continually															to repeatedly or continually pull out		< qesug\super 1\nosupersub -ragh-				qesugragh-	qesugragh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qesugugh-	2sc/ue4-	pull out forcefully and repeatedly		aakani qesugughaa \'91she kept pulling her older sister[\'91s hair]\'92													to forcefully pull out repeatedly		< qesug\super 1\nosupersub -ugh-				qesugugh-	qesugugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qesuqite-	2sc/2bns-	choke on liquids			swallow the wrong way												to choke on liquids; to swallow the wrong way		PY q0cuqit0-				qesuqite-	qesuqite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qete-	2sns-	embrace		qetaa \'91he hugged him\'92 / qetutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  embraced each other\'92; iiggenka qetii \'91he grasped my hands\'92	hug	grasp								put one\'92s arm around (it, him)			to embrace; to hug; to put one\'92s arm around (it, him); to grasp		PE 0q0t- (under PE 0q0-\super 1\nosupersub )				qete-	qete-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qetegh-	2sns4-	bending backwards		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0 qeteghtuq \'91he bent backwards\'92													bending backwards		PE q0t03				qetegh-	qetegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 -\

\f1\b qeteghruk\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2sns4her\super \'a1	\nosupersub spinal area, upper part															upper part of spinal area		< qeteq-ghruk				qeteghruk1	qeteghruk1	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 1\

\f1\b qeteghruk\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2sns4her\super \'99	\nosupersub swim bladder of fish, dried and used to store fish eggs															swim bladder of fish, dried and used to store fish eggs						qeteghruk2	qeteghruk2	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 2\
qeteq	2sns2	spinal area of person		qetgha aqnightaa aleghmi \'91he injured his partner's back\'92	back of person												spinal area of a person; back of person		PE q0t03				qeteq	qeteq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \
qetgaasiq	2sn[6cb2	jump-rope															jump-rope		< qetgagh-(u)siq				qetgasiq	qetgxsiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qetgagh-	2sn[f4-	jump up and down			jump rope												to jump up and down; to jump rope		PE q0t0!- and q0t!03-				qetgagh-	qetgagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qetgaghta	2sn[f5nf	bearded seal pup, playful, that jumps out of the water			
\f2\i Erignathus barbatus 
\f0\i0 (bearded seal) playful pup												playful bearded seal 
\f2\i (Erignathus barbatus) 
\f0\i0 pup that jumps out of the water		< qetgagh-(s)ta				qetgaghta	qetgaghta	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
qetgamlla-	2sn[fvk]z-	jump with low short jumps as in dancing or when having a tantrum															to jump with low short jumps as in dancing or when having a tantrum		< qetgagh-?-				qetgamlla-	qetgamlla-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 -\

\f1\b qetgegh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2sn[s4-\'a1	jump		qetgeghtuq \'91he or it jumped\'92; qetgeghaa \'91he jumped over it\'92 / qetgeghtuq uyghagllagem qaaynganeng \'91he jumped down from the top of the big rock\'92	catch up with	attack											to jump; to catch up with; to attack		PE q0t0!- and q0t!03-		CK V & E 162 (2nd gloss)		qetgegh-1	qetgegh-1	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1099 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub qetgegh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2sn[s4-\'99	rush over to a person at a distance, to greet him, render aid, or investigate															to rush over to a person at a distance, to greet him, render aid, or investigate		cf. PE q0t0!- and q0t!03-				qetgegh-2	qetgegh-2	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1099 \u1271 -\super 2\

\f1\b \nosupersub qetgegh-\super 3	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2sn[s4-\super \'a3	\nosupersub endeavor to consummate one's marriage after bride service to inlaws and now come to their house to claim one's bride		
\f2\i this was the traditional way of getting married with the couple then moving in with the wife's family; elements of this tradition are still practiced													
\f0\i0 to endeavor to consummate one's marriage after bride service to inlaws and now come to their house to claim one's bride		cf. PE q0t0!- and q0t!03-				qetgegh-3	qetgegh-3	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1099 \u1271 -\super 3\
\nosupersub qetgeghtugh-	2sn[s5ne4-	rely on for moral support		qetgeghtughaa \'91he relies on him\'92 /													to rely on for moral support						qetgeghtugh-	qetgeghtugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1093 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qetgeghyaq	2sm[s4mz2	water strider insect		Llaaghanwha paallghunkut, 
\f2\i qetgeghyaankut
\f0\i0 , apayepayiighenkut, melnguunkut qerngughusimalghiit nguuyngaaghaam mangteghaan saaghwanun. \'91And so the mites, the 
\f2\i water striders
\f0\i0 , the spiders, and the beetles gathered by the side of the housefly\'92s house.\'92 (SULUWET 32)	water strider insect												water strider insect						qetgeghyaq	qetgeghyaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1100 \u1093 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
qetngigh-	2sn3b4-	bright and dazzling (be ~ (light))		qetngightuq \'91it is bright and dazzling\'92 /	dazzling (be bright and ~ (light))												to be bright and dazzling (light)		PE qit&i3- and qit&a3- and qit&u3-				qetngigh-	qetngigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qetngiqe-	2sn3b2s-	dazzled (be ~ by bright light)		qetngiqaa \'91he is dazzled by it\'92 /													to be dazzled by bright light		< qetngigh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				qetngiqe-	qetngiqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qetu-	2sne-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > qetulliighagh-, qetumla, qetusqaaq, qetustaaghhaq															PE q0tut-				qetu-	qetu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 -\
qetulliighagh-	2snek]74f4-	soften, become soft															to soften; to become soft		< qetu-lliighagh-				qetullighagh-	qetullxghagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qetumla	2snevkz	soft dirt or soft snow that one sinks into as he walks															soft dirt or soft snow that one sinks into as he walks		< qetu-?				qetumla	qetumla	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \
qetusqaaq	2snec262	soft thing		qetusqaaghet unaghsit ulimanqegtut \'91soft wood is easy to work with\'92; = qetusqwaaq													soft thing		< qetu-?-				qetusqaq	qetusqxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1179 \u257 \u1179 \
qetusqwaaq	2snec2162	soft thing		= qetusqaaq													soft thing		< qetu-?-				qetusqwaq	qetusqwxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qetustaaghhaq*	2snecn65f2	soft thing		qetustaaghhaaguq \'91it is soft\'92; qetustaaghhaq nuna tuutegpenaan \'91don't step in the soft dirt\'92													soft thing		< qetu-staaghhaq				qetustaghhaq*	qetustxghhaq*	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
qetuuqe-	2sn82s-	long time (take a ~ getting ready)		angyaghnaqelghiit unaaghhaaneng qetuuqegkat qenwat whanikwaa \'91the boating crew was taking long getting ready since this morning, and then it became evening time\'92													to take a long time getting ready				CK A & W 90		qetuqe-	qetxqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1263 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qevute-	2sdens-	beat up (a person)		Whavemun kenlanga neqangisagaqukut, meghyaaghqiisagaqukut, aatkiisagaqukut. Yuget 
\f2\i qevutaqiinkut
\f0\i0 . Nengitukut, igleghtaagukut quunpeng. \'91To the present time we\'92ve suffered shortage of food, drink, and clothing. People 
\f2\i beat
\f0\i0  us. We are homeless, and always on the move.\'92 (1 Corinthians 4.11)													to beat up (a person)						qevute-	qevute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1074 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qevuute-	2sd8ns-	use one's might to the greatest degree possible		qevuulluten liinnaqi \'91try as hard as you can to learn\'92; qevuulluni akuziiq \'91he spoke out loudly and forcefully\'92; anuqlighaa elngaatall qevuulluku \'91the wind really blew hard\'92; qevuutepiglluku sayuggu \'91pull it as hard as you can\'92; Elngaatall 
\f2\i qevuulluni
\f0\i0  pugimnaqutkesalghiimi qenwat alquutaghpagem puunga kaasimakanga. \'91Trying to swim 
\f2\i as hard as he could
\f0\i0  he finally got to the handle of the spoon.\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG.  12)	do one's best	speak loud								maximum (act to the ~ amount one can)			to use one's might to the greatest degree possible; to do one's best; to speak loud; to act to the maximum amount one can						qevute-	qevxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1074 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qezilek	2spbksr	jug 		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 pitcher												jug; pitcher		< qeziq-lek		CK E & V 89		qezilek	qezilek	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1079 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
qeziq	2spb2	lip (of person or container)		
\f2\i specifically the lower lip; 
\f0\i0 Legan ugingan tawavek, 
\f2\i qezini
\f0\i0  amqeghtaghlluku, siingyaqminigu legan aga navaghmi ulleghtuq, qeteghaghtuq. \'91Right then and there her husband bit his 
\f2\i lower lip
\f0\i0  and pushed his wife, so she fell backwards and landedon the flat of her back.\'92 (KALLAG. 64)													lip (of person or container)		PY qisiq				qeziq	qeziq	\uc0\u1179 \u1099 \u1079 \u1080 \u1179 \
qigeghtekaq	2bus5nsrf2	fired clay or clay lamp		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qiku	clay or clay lamp, fired	lamp (fired clay ~)											fired clay; fired clay lamp						qigeghtekaq	qigeghtekaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
qighrughagh-	2b4he4f4-	secure an entrance with ropes															to secure an entrance with ropes				VK		qighrughagh-	qighrughagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qighuneq	2b4eys2	murre, young, which is too fat to fly															young murre (
\f2\i Uria spp.
\f0\i0 ) which is too fat to fly						qighuneq	qighuneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Qigi	2bub	former village at Cape Kygynin at eastern end of Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village at Cape Kygynin at eastern end of Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka						Qigi	Qigi	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \
qigiiqa	2br72f	hook made of ivory that is attached to the end of a rope (used for strapping things)		yugem tapghii qamaglluteng qigiiqalguftut \'91all the man\'92s ropes had ivory hooks on them\'92													hook made of ivory that is attached to the end of a rope (used for strapping things)				CK A & W 90		qigiqa	qigxqa	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1251 \u1179 \u1072 \
qigugh-	2bue4-	cut hair short		
\f2\i refers to a male\'92s haircut;
\f0\i0  qigughtuq \'91he got or gave a short haircut\'92; qigughaa \'91he sheared it, gave him a short haircut\'92 / qigughsightuq \'91he had his hair cut short\'92	shear	mow								haircut (get or give a short ~)			to cut hair short; to shear; to mow; to get a short haircut		PY qi!u3-				qigugh-	qigugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qigughaaq	2bue462	meadow		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 grassy area	lawn							check length of final vowel; Rub. gives it long but then gives a plural qigughaat (instead of qigughaaghet)				meadow; grassy area; lawn	ptktym. ke;fqrf	< qigugh-?		Rub. 265		qigughaq	qigughxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \
qigughruk	2bue4her	smoke			smog	smell of a campfire, barbecue, etc.											smoke; smog; smell of a campfire, barbecue, etc.						qigughruk	qigughruk	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
qigughta	2bue5nf	barber															barber	gfhbrvf[th	< qigugh-(s)ta		CK V & E 100 (Russian vocab)		qigughta	qigughta	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
qigughvik	2bue4dbr	barber shop															barber shop		< qigugh-vik				qigughvik	qigughvik	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
qiguk	2buer	reflection of open water shown by dark sky; 			water sky (dark area of sky above open water in ice pack)												reflection of open water shown by dark sky; water sky		PE qiyu(!)(-)				qiguk	qiguk	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1082 \
qiguusiq	2bu8cb2	hair clippers		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qiguusik,
\f2\i  for one pair of clippers	
\f0\i0 clippers (hair ~)												hair clippers		< qigugh-(u)siq				qigusiq	qigxsiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qiifte-	27ans-	turn (it)		qiiftuq \'91he changed plans\'92; qiiftaa \'91he turned it\'92 / angyallightem qiiftaa angyaq siku negughnaluku \'91the captain turned the boat in another direction to avoid the ice\'92; agghilluteng qiifsimiit allanun council-et \'91the council has changed its plans or turned its attention elsewehere\'92	change plans												to turn (it); to change plans		< qiive-te\super 1\nosupersub -				qifte-	qxfte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b qiigh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 274-\'a1	stoke a fire or stove		qiighaa \'91he stoked it\'92 / qiighiiq \'91he stoked something\'92	put wood in stove												to stoke a fire or stove; to put wood in stove		< quuk\super 2\nosupersub -ligh-				qigh-1	qxgh-1	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub qiigh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 274-\'99			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > qiighnagh-, qiighnite-																			qigh-2	qxgh-2	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub qiighista	274bcnf	stroker			boilerman												stroker; boilerman	rjxtufh. bcnjgybr	< qiigh-i\super 1\nosupersub -(s)ta		CK V & E 100		qighista	qxghista	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1271 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
qiighnagh-	274yf4-	slippery (be ~)		qiighnaghtuq \'91it is slippery\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91it slides well\'92 /	slick (be ~)	slide well											to be slippery; to be slick; to slide well		< qiigh\super 2\nosupersub -nagh-				qighnagh-	qxghnagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qiighnaq	274yf2	slippery thing or place															something slippery		< qiigh\super 2\nosupersub -naq				qighnaq	qxghnaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
qiighnirkitagh-	274ybirbnf4-	slide, purposely, (as on the ice) on one's feet as one walks															to purposely slide (as on the ice) on one's feet as one walks		< qiighnite-?-				qighnirkitagh-	qxghnirkitagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1096 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qiighnite-	274ybns-	slip (on ice or other slippery surface)		
\f2\i Qiighnitaghamikun
\f0\i0  eflugakun pangalgumalghii inglunganun agavek llivelghagnun iingkugnun. \'91By his 
\f2\i slipping
\f0\i0  across the floor he (the mouse) ran to the other side to that shelf over there.\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 8)													to slip (on ice or other slippery surface)		< qiigh\super 2\nosupersub -?-				qighnite-	qxghnite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qiighqaq	2752f2	island		
\f2\i Qiighqaq
\f0\i0  esghaqaaluni llangaqa qetkaq inglupigaghmeng iiggmeng, enkaam aatqaa Sivuqaq, Ulimaghistem sivuqaa. \'91The 
\f2\i island
\f0\i0  (St. Lawrence Is.) looks like something that has been squeezed with one hand, and hence it has the name \'93Sivuqaq\'94, the one the Creator wrung out.\'92 (KALLAG. 8)													island		PE qik03ta3				qighqaq	qxghqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
Qiighqaq	@752f2	Punuk Islands off the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is. (middlemost of the ~)		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 middlemost of the Punuk Islands off the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is.						Qighqaq	Qxghqaq	\uc0\u1178 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
qiighw-	2741-	cough		qiighwtuq \'91he coughed\'92, \'91he caught a cold\'92; qiighwtaa \'91he caught a cold\'92; qiighwutaa qiighwlluk \'91he coughed up thick phlegm\'92	cold (get a ~)												to cough; to get a cold		PE quy03-				qighw-	qxghw-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1271 \u1265 -\
qiighwlluk	2715k]/r	phlegm, thick															thick phlegm		< qiiw-ghlluk				qighwlluk	qxghwlluk	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1265 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
qiighwte-	2741ns-	grey hairs (get ~)		qiighwtaquq \'91he's getting grey hairs\'92; aghyuqat qiighwtaqii \'91old people become grey\'92													to get grey hairs		< qiiqw\super 1\nosupersub -?-				qighwte-	qxghwte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qiighwutkaq	2741enrf2	tubercular person															tubercular person		< qiighw-(u)te-kaq				qighwutkaq	qxghwutkaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
qiigniigh-	27uy74-	look for firewood			firewood (look for ~)												to look for firewood		< quuk\super 2\nosupersub -niigh-				qignigh-	qxgnxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
qiiksug-	27rc/u-	self-conscious (be ~)		qiiksugtuq \'91he feels self-conscious, bashful\'92 / qiiksugtestaa \'91he made him feel self-conscious by watching him\'92	uneasy (feel ~ due to being watched)	bashful (feel ~)											to be self-conscious; to feel uneasy due to being watched; to feel bashful						qiksug-	qxksug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qiiksuke-	27rc/rs-	self-conscious (be ~ because of being watched by (him))		qiiksukaa \'91he is self-conscious, feels bashful or overpowered because she is watching him\'92 /	bashful (feel ~ because of being watched by (him))	overpowered (feel ~ because of being watched by (him))											to be self-conscious, feel bashful or overpowered because of being watched by (him)		 < qiiksug-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				qiksuke-	qxksuke-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qiilngumighte-	27k3evb5ns-	convince		aygughiksaghluki qenwat qillngumighsimakangat \'91he didn\'92t believe them at first but they finally convinced him\'92; qiilngumighsatni taawa maligusimalghii \'91when he was convinced, he followed\'92; qiilngumighnaqutkiteggu kayutnguluku \'91try to convince him so he can be of assistance\'92													to convince				CK A & W 90		qilngumighte-	qxlngumighte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qiinghigh-	27y4b4-	acquainted (get fully ~)		esghaqusightem qenwat qiinghighwaaghaa \'91he sees him all the time so he really got to know him\'92	understand	get to know								familiar (get ~ with)			to get fully acquainted; to understand; to get to know; to get familiar with				CK A & W 90		qinghigh-	qxnghigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qiinghute-	27y4ens-	aim at		qiinghutaa \'91he aimed at it\'92 / qiinghutillguuq \'91he is good at aiming, is a good shot\'92													to aim at		< qineghte-(u)te-				qinghute-	qxnghute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qiinghutisiq	27y4enbcb2	back-sight on gun		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 gunsight, back								given as qiinghutiisiq				back-sight on gun	ghbwtkmyfz gkfyrf \'f8e he;mz\uc0\u960 	< qiinghute-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq		Rub. 269		qinghutisiq	qxnghutisiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qiingu	273e	reindeer hair, long, from under the chin		
\f2\i used in a kind of needlepoint; 
\f0\i0 = qiiyngu													long reindeer hair from under the chin						qingu	qxngu	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1187 \u1091 \
qiipaghaghpak	27gf4f4gfr	tarpaulin															tarpaulin		< qiipaghaq-ghpak				qipaghaghpak	qxpaghaghpak	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
qiipaghaq*	27gf4f2*	cloth		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 qiipaghaak,
\f2\i  for a lightweight over-parka	
\f0\i0 fabric	over-parka, lightweight								snowshirt			cloth; fabric; lightweight over-parka; snowshirt		< qiipaq-ghaq				qipaghaq*	qxpaghaq*	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1262 \
qiipaq	27gf2	thread (strand of ~)		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 qiipat, 
\f2\i for thread, spool of thread, or strands of sinew thread	
\f0\i0 spool of thread												strand of  thread; spool of thread		< qiipe-aq				qipaq	qxpaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \
qiipe-	27gs-	twist		qiipuq \'91it got twisted\'92; qiipaa \'91he twisted it, turned it (as when turning a knob\'92 / qiipluku qelpeghtaa \'91he opened it by twisting it\'92; qiiputaak \'91he twisted them\sub 2\nosupersub  together\'92; qiiputaa tapghaq napaqakun \'91he wrapped the rope around the pole\'92	turn (a knob or the like)												to twist; to turn (a knob or the like)		< qipe-				qipe-	qxpe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1099 -\
qiipi-	27gb-	thread (make hand-made ~)		
\f2\i done by twisting shredded sinew or other fiber in a special way													
\f0\i0 to make hand-made thread		< qiipaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -				qipi-	qxpi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1080 -\
qiipraghun	27gif4ey	chain		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  qiipraghutet,
\f2\i  for one chain; Qiipraghutenglunga 
\f0\i0 qikmiput petugteghanka. \'91I bought
\f2\i  chains 
\f0\i0 and tied up our dogs.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 130)													chain		< qiipraq-?-(u)n				qipraghun	qxpraghun	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1096 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
qiipraq	27gif2	fat on intestine of walrus		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qiipe-													fat on intestine of walrus						qipraq	qxpraq	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1096 \u1072 \u1179 \
qiiptaasiq	27gn6cb2	pole used for gathering kelp															pole used for gathering kelp		< qiiptagh-(u)siq				qiptasiq	qxptxsiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qiiptagh-	27gnf4-	gather kelp by twisting it, under the water, onto a special pole		Ukisamigu qiiptaasini ateghlluku 
\f2\i qiiptaamalghii
\f0\i0  elqwaaghmeng.  \'91When he made a hole in it [the ice] he lowered his kelp-gathering tool and by 
\f2\i twisting it gathered
\f0\i0  some kelp.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 20)	kelp (gather ~ by twisting it, under the water, onto a special pole)												to gather kelp by twisting it, under the water, onto a special pole		< qiipe-?-				qiptagh-	qxptagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qiiptaq	27gnf2	kelp that is gathered by being wound on a special pole															kelp that is gathered by being wound on a special pole		< qiipe-te\super 1\nosupersub -aq				qiptaq	qxptaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qiipuumaraghuq	27g8vfhf4e2	curly-haired person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 curly-haired person		< qiipe-?		CK Rub 272		qipumaraghuq	qxpxmaraghuq	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1263 \u1084 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 \
qiiqruq	2b2ie2	frozen fast (thing that is ~ to the ground)		yuuk mallungumalghii qiiqruuteghllakameng aghveghmeng \'91a man found a whale carcass that was frozen to the ground\'92													thing that is frozen fast to the ground				CK A & W 91		qiqruq	qxqruq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \u1096 \u1091 \u1179 \

\f1\b qiiqw\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2712\'a1	grey hair			hair, grey												grey hair		PE qi903				qiqw1	qxqw1	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1265 \u1179 1\

\f1\b qiiqw\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2712\'99	cough			cold (respiratory illness)												cough; cold (respiratory illness)		PE quy03-				qiqw2	qxqw2	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1265 \u1179 2\
qiivaqu-	27df2e-	turn one\'92s head side to side and look around		anipa nalugluni qiivaquluni tenguq \'91an owl landed, turned its head side to side, and then flew away\'92	look around by turning one\'92s head side to side												to turn one\'92s head side to side and look around		< qiive-?-qu- (?)		CK A & W 91		qivaqu-	qxvaqu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
qiive-	27ds-	turn body or head		qiivuq \'91he turned\'92; qiivaa \'91he turned toward her or it\'92 / qiivuq ukavek aqumtaaghngaaghmi \'91he turned this way as he sat\'92; angyaghpaget taanegkut qiivut ukavek taakwa \'91that ship out there is turning this way and coming\'92; aghnam qiiviinkut ugingiilluni \'91the woman has turned to us for moral support since she lost her husband\'92	turn toward someone for help	make a turn while traveling											to turn body or head; to make a turn while traveling; to turn toward someone for help		< qive-				qive-	qxve-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1074 \u1099 -\
qiivyaghaq	27dmz4f2	bend in the trail															bend in the trail	gjdjhjn \'f8genb. ljhjub\uc0\u960 	< qiive-yaghaq		Rub. 265; CK		qivyaghaq	qxvyaghaq	\u1179 \u1251 \u1074 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qiiyngu	27q3e	reindeer hair, long, from under the chin		
\f2\i used in a kind of needlepoint; 
\f0\i0 = qiingu; Angyalgem nulighhan, qilleghtengnguut taakut, taqughtekun, 
\f2\i qiiyngut
\f0\i0  amenqun quyngim manungi melqughtuqat. \'91The captain\'92s wife would take a tuft of 
\f2\i reindeer chin hair
\f0\i0  and tie it onto her braid.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:218)													long reindeer hair from under the chin						qiyngu	qxyngu	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 \
qiiyngu-	27q3e-	decorate with a kind of needlepoint done with long reindeer hair from under the chin															to decorate with a kind of needlepoint done with long reindeer hair from under the chin						qiyngu-	qxyngu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1253 \u1187 \u1091 -\
Qikeghtapaget	@brs5nfgfusn	islands in western part of Koozata Lagoon (Naayvaghllak) on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 islands in western part of Koozata Lagoon (Naayvaghllak) on St. Lawrence Is.						Qikeghtapaget	Qikeghtapaget	\uc0\u1178 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \
qikeghte-	2brs5ns-	bend		sivutmun qikightaghaquyeng piniighleqii \'91if they are bent further forward, they\'92ll be better\'92													to bend						qikeghte-	qikeghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qikighneq	2brb4ys2	bent part		qamiyemi ighunii qikighneghtughtepagumakangi \'91he bent the parts that holds the sled-bed to the runners of his sled too much\'92; tiintam neghqwaaghtaan qikighneghi pinightut \'91the degree to which the tent frame members are bent is good\'92	curve												bent part; curve		< qikeghte-neq\super 2		\nosupersub CK A & W 91		qikighneq	qikighneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qikighqe-	2brb52s-	bent (become ~)			crooked (become ~)												to become bent; to become crooked		< qikigh-?-				qikighqe-	qikighqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qikighqugh-	2brb52e4-	set (a saw blade or the like)		quugmun kepuusim savigtii qikighneghiisata qikighquumi \'91the teeth of the saw that is used to cut logs were not set so he set them\'92; qikighquqani pilagtuusim savigtii qikighneghqelliighaamakangi \'91he did not set the teeth of the saw enough\'92													to set (a saw blade or the like)		qikeghte-qugh-		CK A & W 91		qikighqugh-	qikighqugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qikmighaq	2brv]b4f2	puppy															puppy		< qikmiq-ghaq				qikmighaq	qikmighaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qikmighwaaq	2brv]b4162	bone in upper arm			ulna	figurine of any animal worn as a charm											bone in upper arm; ulna; figurine of any animal worn as a charm		PY qikmi3uaq\super 2\nosupersub  (under PE qikmi3); < qikmiq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				qikmighwaq	qikmighwxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qikmiiraaq	2brv]7h62	dog-skin, dried, fomerly used for parka trim															dried dog-skin fomerly used for parka trim		< qikmiq-?-				qikmiraq	qikmxrxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1251 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
qikmiq	2brvb2	dog															dog		PE qikmi3				qikmiq	qikmiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \
qikngughaqaq	2br3]e4f2f2	needle, glover\'92s (three-cornered)			glover\'92s needle	three-cornered needle											glover\'92s (three-cornered) needle						qikngughaqaq	qikngughaqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
qiku	2bre	clay		
\f2\i formerly used for making seal-oil lamps; cf.
\f0\i0  qigeghtekaq													clay		PE qiku				qiku	qiku	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \
qilag-	2bkzu-	net (make a ~)		qilagtuq \'91he made a net\'92; qilagaa \'91he made it (a net)\'92 /													to make a net		PE qila!-				qilag-	qilag-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 -\
qilaga	2bkzuf	sky		qilaga aliighaa \'91the sky is clearing\'92													sky		< qilak-?				qilaga	qilaga	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \
qilaget	2bkzusn	patterning of tattoos on the cheek		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); this is a plural; cf.
\f0\i0  qilak													patterning of tattoos on the cheek				CK Rub 267		qilaget	qilaget	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \
qilagigh-	2bkzub4-	overcast (become ~)			cloudy (become ~)												to become overcast; to become cloudy		< qilak-(ng)igh-				qilagigh-	qilagigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qilaglluuk	2bkz[k]0r	cloud (dark storm ~)															dark storm cloud		< qilak-?				qilaglluk	qilagllxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1082 \
qilak	2bkzr	heavens															heavens		PE qila!				qilak	qilak	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \
qilawaaq	2bkz162	cloud															cloud		< qilak-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				qilawaq	qilawxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qilegi	2bksub	fat on reindeer intestine		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qilu													fat on reindeer intestine						qilegi	qilegi	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \

\f1\b qilevri\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2bksdhb\super \'a1	\nosupersub Lapland Cassiope stems used as tinder or wilderness fuel		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qilu	tinder (or wilderness fuel) -- thin, knotted bent stem of Lapland Cassiope plant	
\f2\i Cassiope tetragona											
\f0\i0 thin, knotted, bent stem of the Lapland Cassiope plant 
\f2\i (Cassiope tetragona)
\f0\i0  used as tinder or fuel (in the wilderness)				the plant ID is from an article by B. A. Tikhomirov		qilevri1	qilevri1	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1080 1\

\f1\b qilevri\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2bksdhb\super \'99	\nosupersub fat on outside of reindeer intestines		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qilu													fat on outside of reindeer intestines						qilevri2	qilevri2	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1080 2\
qilgha-	2bk4f-	complain		qilghaaq \'91he complained\'92 /	annoyed (be ~)	irritated (be ~)								critical (be ~)			to complain; to be annoyed; to be irritated; to be critical						qilgha-	qilgha-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 -\
qilghake-	2bk4frs-	annoyed or irritated over (it) (be ~)		qilghakaa \'91he is annoyed over it\'92 /	criticize												to be annoyed or irritated over (it); to criticize		< qilgha-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				qilghake-	qilghake-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qilghayagute-	2bk4fzuens-	irritable (become ~)															to become irritable		< qilgha-yagute-				qilghayagute-	qilghayagute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qilghayug-	2bk4f/u-	irritable (be ~)															to be irritable		< qilgha-yug-				qilghayug-	qilghayug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qiliigh-, qiliighyug-	2bk74-. 2bk74/u-	covet something		qiliigh- 
\f2\i is esentially an \'91emotional root\'92 (see 
\f0\i0 qiliiqe-/qiliiyuke-, qiliighnagh- 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  qiliighnaq)
\f2\i , but it can be used as is in place of
\f0\i0  qiliighyug-; qiliightuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qiliighyugtuq \'91he desires something\'92 / mekelghiighhaq elngaatall qiliightuq naghaaghutmeng \'91the little boy really wished to have the toys\'92	desire something												to covet something; to desire something						qiligh-, qilighyug-	qilxgh-, qilxghyug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -, \u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qiliighnagh-	2bk74yf4-	desirable (be ~)															to be desirable		< qiliigh-nagh-				qilighnagh-	qilxghnagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qiliighnaq	2bk74yf2	desirable thing															desirable thing		< qiliigh-naq				qilighnaq	qilxghnaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
qiliiqe-, qiliighyuke-	2bk72s-. 2bk74/rs-	covet (it)		qiliiqaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qiliighyukaa \'91he desires it\'92 / uvilighneghpesi salqumsingi qiliighyukegpenaki \'91whatever it is that your neighbor has, don't covet them\'92	desire (it)												to covet (it); to desire (it)		< qiliigh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				qiliqe-, qilighyuke-	qilxqe-, qilxghyuke-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1251 \u1179 \u1099 -, \u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qilleghneq	2bk]s4ys2	knot															knot		PE qi@03n03 (under PE qi@03); < qilleghte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub qilleghneq	qilleghneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qilleghtaq	2bk]s5nf2	sheaf of grass			grass (sheaf of ~)								looks good				sheaf of grass	cdzprf nhfds. cyjg	< qilleghte-(g)aq		Rub. 268		qilleghtaq	qilleghtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qilleghte-	2bk]s5ns-	tie		qilleghtaa \'91he tied it\'92 / qillghutaa \'91he tied it to something\'92; qilleghtengngwaaghaa \'91he tied it securely\'92													to tie		PE qi@03-				qilleghte-	qilleghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b qilleghtuqaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2bk]s5ne2f2\'a1	sheath for harpoon point		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qilleghte-													sheath for harpoon point						qilleghtuqaq1	qilleghtuqaq1	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b qilleghtuqaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2bk]s5ne2f2\'99	knot at end of rope to keep it from unraveling of slipping off something		satemnayukan tapghaq uyguskuvgu qilleghtuqighnaken \'91put a knot on the rope to keep from slipping off when you tie it as an extention to the other rope\'92													knot at tend of rope to keep it from unraveling or slipping off  something				CK A & W 91		qilleghtuqaq2	qilleghtuqaq2	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 2\
qilleghvikuusaq	2bk]s4dbr8cf2	string with beads tied formerly onto new or special objects															string with beads tied formerly onto new or special objects		< qillegh(te)-?-(u)saq		CK A & W 91		qilleghvikusaq	qilleghvikxsaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1263 \u1089 \u1072 \u1179 \
qillghutaq	2bk]5enf2	tie rope, cord or string															tie rope, cord or string		< qilleghte-(u)taq				qillghutaq	qillghutaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qilu	2bk/	intestine		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qilegi	coiled spring (e.g. bedspring)												intestine; coiled spring (e.g. bedspring)		PE qilu				qilu	qilu	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \
qilug-	2bk/u-	bark (of dog)		qilugtuq \'91it barked\'92; qilugaa \'91it barked at him\'92 / qilugutut \'91they barked at each other\'92; qilugpaghquuq \'91it barked loudly\'92													to bark (of dog)		PE qilu!-				qilug-	qilug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qilughru	2bk/4he	eight (the number ~ in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qilu
\f2\i ; the entire jingle is:
\f0\i0  aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'	counting jingle (the number \'91eight\'92 in a ~ or finger naming jingle for children)	jingle (the number \'91eight\'92 in a counting or finger naming ~ for children)											the number eight (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)						qilughru	qilughru	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \
qilughwaaq	2bke4162	outcropping of rock		Naayghami qilughwaaghet ataasit aatghi Tenguglluget \'91at the Gambell mountain, there is one pile of rocks called Tenguglluget\'92; qilughwaaghnun mayughluni aruughtuq \'91he climbed on the the pile of rocks and looked around\'92	rock outcropping												outcropping of rock		< qilu-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				qilughwaq	qilughwxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1091 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qimag-	2bvfu-	flee		qimagtuq \'91he or it fled\'92; qimagaa \'91he fled from it; it fled from him\'92 /	run away												to flee; to run away		PE qima!-				qimag-	qimag-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 -\
qimagraa-	2bvfuh6-	run (be on the ~)		yimitiqem mekelghiiq ilamineng qimagraaluni ayuqeftuq \'91a boy was running away from his friends because of shyness\'92; qikmiq nuyaalghii qimagraalghii naghpighluku petugumakangat \'91they lassoed a dog that was running away because it was so so timid and they tethered it\'92													to be on the run		< qimag-ragh-?-		CK A & W 92; VK		qimagra-	qimagrx-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 -\
qimagugh-	2bvfue4-	run away repeatedly		mekelghiighhaam naani qimagughaa \'91the little boy kept running away from his mother\'92													to repeated run away		< qimag-ugh-		VK		qimagugh-	qimagugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qimpalungiq	2bvgfk/3b2	tanner crab			crab (tanner ~)	
\f2\i Chionoecetes bairdi											
\f0\i0 tanner crab 
\f2\i (Chionoecetes bairdi)						
\f0\i0 qimpalungiq	qimpalungiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
qimug-	2bveu-	trained (to be ~ (of a dog being trained for sled use))		qimugtuq \'91it got trained\'92 / qimugtaa \'91he trained it\'92													to be trained (of a dog being trained for sled use)		PE qimu!-				qimug-	qimug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1075 -\
qimugilnguq	2bveubk3e2	hunter, from whom a wounded animal does not escape (according to folk belief)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 hunter, from whom a wounded animal does not escape (according to folk belief)	j[jnybr. jn rjnjhjuj hfytysq pdthm yt e,tuftn \'f8gj cetdthysv ghtlcnfdktybzv\uc0\u960 	< qimuk-(ng)ite-nguq		Rub. 268		qimugilnguq	qimugilnguq	\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
qimugsigh-	2bve[cb4-	dogteam (travel by ~)		qimugsightuq \'91he went by dogteam\'92 /	travel by dogteam	go by dogteam											to travel by dogteam		PE qimu!ci3(-); < qimug-?-				qimugsigh-	qimugsigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qimugsiq	2bve[cb2	dogteam															dogteam		PE qimu!ci3(-); < qimug-?				qimugsiq	qimugsiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qimugtagh-	2bve[nf4-	train (take a pup on a training run)															to take a pup on a training run		< qimug-tagh-				qimugtagh-	qimugtagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qimugtuqaq	2bve[ne2f2	striker who strikes whales that are still so strong that they can get far away		sivuyagteni qimugtuqaq simighaa allaneng \'91he changed his striker who strikes whales that stay strong when struck\'92													striker who strikes whales that are still so strong that they can get far away		< qimuk-?		CK A & W 92		qimugtuqaq	qimugtuqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
qimuk	2bver	game animal			animal (game ~)												game animal						qimuk	qimuk	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1082 \
qimukaq	2bverf2	dog that has been trained for sled use															dog that has been trained for sled use		< qimug-(g)kaq				qimukaq	qimukaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
qimuke-	2bvers-	pursue (it) as a game animal		qimukaa \'91he pursued it\'92 /													to pursue (it) as a game animal		< qimuk-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				qimuke-	qimuke-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qineghpeghwaagh-	2bys5gs4164-	look at with telescope or binoculars		qineghpeghwaaghtuq \'91he looked with a scope\'92; qineghpeghwaaghaa \'91he looked it with a scope\'92 / Esghaghhu Wangqetelem tazingken quyngiq 
\f2\i qineghpeghwaaghyaghluku
\f0\i0  esghaamakanginkut. \'91See, while Wongitilin was 
\f2\i looking with the binoculars
\f0\i0  for the reindeer, he saw us.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:12)													to look at with telescope or binoculars		< qineghte-?-(g/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -				qineghpeghwagh-	qineghpeghwxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
qineghpeghwaaghun	2bys5gs4164ey	telescope		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qineghpeghwaaghutek, 
\f2\i for a pair of binoculars	
\f0\i0 binoculars												telescope; binoculars		< qineghpeghwaagh-(u)n				qineghpeghwaghun	qineghpeghwxghun	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
qineghpugag-	2bys5geufu-	look at with telescope or binoculars															to look at with telescope or binoculars		< qineghte-?-				qineghpugag-	qineghpugag-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1075 -\
qineghpugagun	2bys5geufuey	telescope		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qineghpugagutek,
\f2\i  for a pair of binoculars	
\f0\i0 binoculars												telescope; binoculars		< qineghpugag-				qineghpugagun	qineghpugagun	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
qineghte-	2bys5ns-	look (or look at) through an opening, a window, door, sight, scope, etc.		qineghtuq \'91he looked through an opening\'92; qineghtaa \'91he looked at it through an opening\'92 / qineghten qergesegnekun! \'91look through the window!\'92; qiinghutaa taghnughhani esghiisqelluku whangkunnun \'91she looked out together with the baby letting us see the baby\'92													to look (or look at) through an opening, a window, door, sight, scope, etc.		PE qin03-				qineghte-	qineghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qingagh-	2b3f4-	persnickety (e.g. over food) (be ~)		qingaghtuq \'91he was being persnickety\'92, \'91he rejected something /	reject something (often food)												to be persnickety (e.g. over food); to reject something (often food)		PE qi&&a3-				qingagh-	qingagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qingaghnalghii	2b3f4yfk47	unpredictable, dangerous or wild thing		amsakaghtat ayveghet qingaghnalghiit \'91small walruses are unpredictable\'92;
\f2\i  cf. 
\f0\i0 qingagh-													unpredictable, dangerous or wild thing				CK A & W 92		qingaghnalghi	qingaghnalghx	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
qingaghwiqe-	2b3f41b2s-	unpredictable, wild and hazardous (become ~)		qingaghwiqsan siklaghnayukangisteng guusimakangat \'91when it became  wild, in case it came and hit the boat with it\'92s tusks, they shot it\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qingagh-													to become unpredictable, wild and hazardous				CK A & W 92		qingaghwiqe-	qingaghwiqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qingakute-	2b3frens-	stay away from others		nelliqelghiineng qingakullusinguq kiyaghtek \'91stay away from those that get into mischief\'92; qingakusimatmineng ilataamangilnguq \'91due to his not wanting to do things, he refrained from joining others\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qingagh-	keep away from trouble												to stay away from others; to keep away from trouble				CK A & W 92		qingakute-	qingakute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qingakutke-	2b3frenrs-	avoid trouble															to avoid trouble				VK		qingakutke-	qingakutke-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qingaqe-	2b3f2s-	reject (it - food)		qingaqaa \'91he doesn't want to taste or eat it\'92 /	distasteful (find (it - food) ~)												to reject (it - food); to find (it - food) distasteful		< qingagh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				qingaqe-	qingaqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qingrag-	2b3hfu-	get away from annoyance or disturbance		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qingragh-									check; same as qingragh- ?				to get away from annoyance or disturbance				VK		qingrag-	qingrag-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1088 \u1072 \u1075 -\
qingragh-	2b3hf4-	conceal		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E); cf. 
\f0\i0 qingrag-	run away												to conceal; to run away	crhsdfncz			CK V & E 190; Rub 270		qingragh-	qingragh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qingsig-	2b3cbu-	look aside at something		qingsigtuq \'91he glanced at something\'92; qingsigaa \'91he glanced at it\'92 /	glance at something												to look aside at something; to glance at something; to glance at something		PE qikci!- (under PE qik0-\super 1\nosupersub )				qingsig-	qingsig-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 -\
qingsugaghte-	2b3c/uf5ns-	hangnail (get a ~)			fingernail (get a broken ~)	broken fingernail (get a ~)											to get a hangnail or broken fingernail		PE qi&cu!(-)				qingsugaghte-	qingsugaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qingwaangite-	2b3163bns-	disrespect the ownership rights of others		qingwaangilliqesnanighaqiit avaqutateng angayuqam \'91parents tell their children not to bother another\'92s belongings\'92; qingwaangilnguq \'91one who does not respect the property of others, helps himself to it, plays with it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qingagh-													to disrespect the ownership rights of others				CK A & W 92		qingwangite-	qingwxngite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qinu-	2bye-	annoyed (be ~)		qinuuq \'91he is disinclined to act\'92 /	disinclined (be ~ to act)												to be annoyed; to be disinclined to act		PE qinu-				qinu-	qinu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1091 -\
qinuke-	2byers-	annoyed (be ~ with)		qinukaa \'91he is bored or annoyed with it\'92 / qinukluki qakemkut akuzighllaget amik uumgaa\'92 being annoyed by those talking so much outside the house he closed the door\'92; wiin qinukii sukilpalghun aftalaneghmeng ugliitneng apalluqluki \'91she feels no enthusiasm at this time for skinning the auklets because they are so numerous\'92	lack interest in	bored (be ~ with)								disinclined (be ~ to do (it))			to be annoyed with; to lack interest in; to be bored with; to be disinclined to do (it)		< qinu-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				qinuke-	qinuke-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qinunaghqe-	2byeyf52s-	tease		qinunaghquq \'91he is provoking others\'92; qinunaghqaa \'91he provoked him\'92 / mekelghiighhaq qinunaghqengngan apangan aghyuughaa \'91when the young boy misbehaved by bothering others, his grandfather scolded him\'92	pester	provoke								bother			to tease; to pester; to provoke; to bother		< qinu-nagh\super \'a3\nosupersub - (?)				qinunaghqe-	qinunaghqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qinuyagute-	2byezuens-	tire of it		qinuyagutaa \'91he tired of it\'92 / qinuyagulluki akuzighllaget amik uumgaa \'91she got tired of them talking so much and closed the door\'92													to tire of (it); to begin to find it wearisome		< qinu-yagute-				qinuyagute-	qinuyagute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1091 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qinuyug-	2bye/u-	overwhelmed (feel ~ by the tasks facing one)		qinuyugtuq \'91he got sick\'92 / qinuyugtestaa \'91it made him sick\'92; qinuyuguuq \'91he is sick\'92	sick (get ~)	irritated from being pestered (feel ~)											to feel overwhelmed by the tasks facing one; to get sick; to feel irritated from being pestered		< qinu-yug-				qinuyug-	qinuyug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1091 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qinuyugte-	2bye/[ns-	pester		Aghnam piiqsaghaanguq, \'93
\f2\i Qinuyugtaghpenga
\f0\i0 , ingaghfiknaanghitamken, ingaghlluten qavaa.  Ingaghfiknaanghitngwaaghamken.\'94Ii, yugem 
\f2\i qinuyugtaa
\f0\i0 . \'91The woman kept telling him, \'93You 
\f2\i keep
\f0\i0  
\f2\i pestering
\f0\i0  me, but I won\'92t go to bed with you; you go to bed and sleep. I absolutely won\'92t go to bed with you. But, the man 
\f2\i kept pestering
\f0\i0  her.\'92 (SULUWET 91)													to pester		< qinuyug-te\super 1\nosupersub -				qinuyugte-	qinuyugte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1091 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qipe-	2bgs-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > qiipe-, qipellegaq, qiperutaagh-, qipetaq, qipugh-, qipugute-															PE qip0-				qipe-	qipe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 -\
qipellegaq	2bgsk]suf2	curly or kinky hair															curly or kinky hair		< qipe-?-				qipellegaq	qipellegaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
qipengayak	2bgs3fzr	one with curly hair		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 one with curly hair		< qipe-?		CK Rub 272		qipengayak	qipengayak	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1103 \u1082 \
qiperutaagh-	2bgshen64-	twist repeatedly		qiperutaaghutaak naangngwaaghaatek \'91he twisted the swing chains around and around\'92													to twist repeatedly		< qipe-?-				qiperutagh-	qiperutxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
qipesqinghaaghte-	2bgsc2by4f5ns-	soak too much (of boot soles)		aghisighagni puygulukek qipesqinghaaghsimalghiik \'91she forgot the boot soles she was soaking so they were soaked too much\'92; qipesqinghaaghtekak kinengllaghaqaak \'91the boot soles that were soaked too much are being dried out\'92													to soak too much (of boot soles)				CK A & W 92		qipesqinghaghte-	qipesqinghxghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qipesqinghaghte-	2bgsc2by4f5ns-	soaked (be overly ~ (of skin-boot soles being soaked before shaping))															to be overly soaked (of skin-boot soles being soaked before shaping)				VK		qipesqinghaghte-	qipesqinghaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qipetaq, qiipetaq	2bgsnf2. 27gsnf2	doorknob			key	handle operated by turning								latch operated by turning			doorknob; key; handle or latch operated by turning		< qiipe-?				qipetaq, qipetaq	qipetaq, qxpetaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 , \u1179 \u1251 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qipleghaghte-	2bgk]s4f5ns-	break by twisting or being twisted too much		ivenruutangita tukughakek qipleghaghsimalghiik \'91their outboard motor\'92s bottom part broke from being twisted back and forth too much\'92; tuquuqaq iiknaqluku qipleghaghsimakanga \'91they tried to take out the nail, but they broke it in two from twisting it too much\'92													to break by twisting or being twisted too much		< qipe-leghagh-te\super 1\nosupersub -		CK A & W 93		qipleghaghte-	qipleghaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qipleghraasiq	rbgk]s4h6cb2	poker for fire		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 poker for fire	rjxthuf	< qipleghte-?-(u)siq		CK Rub 271		qipleghrasiq	qipleghrxsiq	\uc0\u1082 \u1080 \u1087 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
qipleghte-	2bgks5ns-	stir		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 knead	shake up											to stir; knead; to shake up	vtifnm. hfpvtibdfnm\\ dp,fknsdfnm	< qipe-?-		CK V & E 186		qipleghte-	qipleghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qipugh-	2bge4-	wind a clock, watch, etc. 															to wind a clock, watch, etc.		< qipe-ugh-				qipugh-	qipugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qipugute-	2bgeuens-	mess things up															to mess things up		< qipe-?-(u)te-				qipugute-	qipugute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qipuqaq	2bge2f2	humpback whale		Chukotkan (R, V & E); 
\f2\i Rubtsova (1975) glosses this as \'93sperm whale\'94; these whales are not found in the area, but their teeth are sometimes founded on beaches; Emelyanova and Vakhtin (1988) glosses this as \'93humbpack whale\'94 which agrees with the meaning in other Eskimo languages	
\f0\i0 Megaptera novaeangliae	sperm whale (?)							glossed as \'93sperm whale\'94 in R, probably in error as that type of whale is not found in the area	whale (humpback ~)			humpback whale
\f2\i  (Megaptera novaeangliae);
\f0\i0  sperm whale (?)		PE qipuqqa3	05	V-E, R		qipuqaq	qipuqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
qirgesae	2bhusczs	window		
\f2\i also dual,
\f0\i0  qirgesek, 
\f2\i for one window;
\f0\i0  = qergesa; Unaaq 
\f2\i qirgesegnekun
\f0\i0  qineghllunga tengegkayuget esghaghanka. \'91This morning I looked through the 
\f2\i window
\f0\i0  and saw the airplane.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 143)													window		from Chukchi qer!0c0n \'91opening for letting light in, window\'92	14			qirgesae	qirgesae	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1088 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1099 \
qirpaawi-	2big61b-	eager (be ~)			enthusiastic (be ~)	exert effort in order to finish a task (despite difficulties)							VK has \'91to have a hard time \'85 to the point where one gets frustrated\'92 				to be eager and enthusiastic; to exert effort in order to finish a task (despite difficulties)		from Chukchi ?	14 x			qirpawi-	qirpxwi-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1096 \u1087 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\
qisemna	2bcsvyf	whetstone		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 = qesemna	rock used as whetstone	sharpening stone							check; what is the source of this word? it sounds like Chukchi, but I can\'92t find it -- I feel like I\'92ve seen it somewhere before				whetstone; rock used as whetstone; sharpening stone	njxbkj	from Chukchi ?	x	Rub. 273		qisemna	qisemna	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1089 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
qitaaqae	2bn62fs	silver salmon			coho salmon	Oncorhynchus kisutch											silver or coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch)		from Chukchi  qetaqet \'91chum salmon\'92	02, 14			qitaqae	qitxqae	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \u1072 \u1099 \
qitavestaaq	2bnfdscn62	snare for catching auklets		qitavestaaghluku qawiimalghii kiwani naayghami \'91he caught a lot of birds by snare at the north end of the mountain\'92; qawaagniighusiilluku ayumiq qitavestaaghet sukilpaghniighusit \'91when there weren\'92t any shotguns they used bird snares to catch auklets\'92													snare for catching auklets				CK A & W 93		qitavestaq	qitavestxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
qitegh-	2bns4-	beat one\'92s wife		qiitghaa \'91he beat her\'92; qiteneghmeng qenwat nuliini ungughtestaa apanganun \'91by his constantly beating his wife he caused her grandfather to take her back\'92													to beat one's wife		PE qit03-				qitegh-	qitegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 -\
Qitelnguq	@bnsk3e2	Kittilngook Bay site on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on Kittilngook Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		< ?-nguq				Qitelnguq	Qitelnguq	\uc0\u1178 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
qiteve-	2bnsds-	speak a language different from Yupik		qitevuq \'91he is speaking another language\'92, \'91he is jabbering\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is speaking Chukchi\'92 / qitevutaa \'91he is talking to her in another language\'92, \'91he is jabbering to her\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is speaking Chukchi to her\'92; 
\f2\i Qiteva
\f0\i0  nagataqaa tespamani, aleghquutaqut katam whangkuta whaten aleghquunnemta. \'91I heard 
\f2\i Chukchi
\f0\i0  spoken over there and they speak (it) just as (naturally) as we speak (our language).\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH.  2:198); Qitevaqelghii, tusaqigalkegka. \'91In as much as he would speak Chukchi, I didn\'92t understand him.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:192)	jabber	speak Chukchi								Chukchi (speak ~)			to speak a language different from Yupik; to jabber; to speak Chukchi		PE qit0v0(t)-				qiteve-	qiteve-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
qitik	2bnbr	not until		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle; 
\f0\i0 = qituk	if not for	finally											not until; if not for; until finally		from Chukchi \'93qiteu\'92\'94 \'91even now\'92		CK Rub 273		qitik	qitik	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1080 \u1082 \
Qitnegaq	@bny]suf2	Kitnagak Pt. (and bay) on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kitnagak Pt. (and bay) on St. Lawrence Is.						Qitnegaq	Qitnegaq	\uc0\u1178 \u1080 \u1090 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
Qitnek	@bny]sr	Cape Kitnik on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Kitnik Cape on St. Lawrence Is.												Cape Kitnik on St. Lawrence Is.				from Yupik Lore, vol. 		Qitnek	Qitnek	\uc0\u1178 \u1080 \u1090 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \
qituk	2bner	not until		
\f2\i particle; Qituk
\f0\i0  maaken qineghpeghwaaghutkun esghaateqaghllunga maani enraq yulguftuq. \'91
\f2\i Finally
\f0\i0  I suddenly saw [one] from here with the binoculars, but it had [another] owner.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:176); = qitik	if not for	until finally											not until; if not for; until finally		from Chukchi \'93qiteu\'92\'94 \'91even now\'92				qituk	qituk	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \
qivagnaq	2bdfuyf2	bold person		qivagnaatmineng qenwat avutkaghsiightuq \'91he\'92s so bold, not hesitant about doing anything, that he has been blamed for a lot of things\'92; qivagniqlaataghyan aghyuughumakanga \'91when he did anything he pleased again, he was scolded\'92													bold person; one who isn\'92t shy and who doesn\'92t hesitate to do anything				CK A & W 93		qivagnaq	qivagnaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
qivallekeltaq	2bdfk]srsk]nf2	pressure ridge, low but still difficult to walk across		
\f2\i see item 57 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												low pressure ridge but still difficult to walk across		< qive-?				qivallekeltaq	qivallekeltaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qivalluk	2bdfk]/r	pressure ridge, large and hard to walk across (requires climbing up and down)		piyaqnaghtutkaaq qivallugestun \'91it is as rough as when there are pressure ridges blocking the way\'92; 
\f2\i see item 58 in Oozeva et al. 
\f0\i0 2004	sea ice that has not leveled off and has lots of pressure ridges												large pressure ridge, hard to walk across (requires climbing up and down); sea ice that has not leveled off and has lots of pressure ridges		< qive-?-lluk				qivalluk	qivalluk	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
qive-	2bds-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > qivesngagh-, qivenghak, qivalluk, qivallekeltaq															PE qiv0(3)- \'91turn (back)\'92				qive-	qive-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 -\
qivenghak	2bdsy4fr	sea ice field with piles of ice here and there		
\f2\i see item 59 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004													sea ice field with piles of ice here and there		< qive-?				qivenghak	qivenghak	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1082 \
qivesnagh-	2bdscyf4-	change directions repeatedly		angyat taan\'92ga qivesnaghllaguut \'91the boat out there is continuously turning\'92; awiim sameng piluteng qivesnalghiit \'91they most likely saw something and kept on turning\'92; telaanangat qivesnaqaghluteng ifkaghtiit telaanangateng \'91the sailboat kept on turning then they dropped their sails\'92	turn every which way												to change direction repeatedly; to turn every which way		< qive-?-nagh-		CK A & W 93		qivesnagh-	qivesnagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qivghu-	2bd4e-	sorry (be ~ about a loss) 		qivghuuq \'91he is sorry, grieving\'92 / qivghulghiit takwaaghtiki ilutuqusiyaghtughqii \'91please go and give moral support to those who are grieving\'92; Ruuseghmiimun tawavek kelgutaa.  
\f2\i Qivghuuq
\f0\i0  tukfilleghmineng tawavek. Uuleghmiit puughtengngwaaghumakangat. \'91He revealed (what was going on) to the Russian. He (the Russian) 
\f2\i regretted
\f0\i0  having bought it. The Uelen people had really fooled him.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:130)	grieve over the loss of a loved one or cherished possession	regret											to be sorry about a loss; to grieve over the loss of a loved one or cherished possession; to regret		PE qiv3u-				qivghu-	qivghu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1271 \u1091 -\
qivghuke-	2bd4ers-	feel bad about (it)		qivghukaa \'91he feels bad over it\'92 / qivghukaa qayuusiq sigiqluku \'91he sorry about breaking the cup\'92	sorry (feel ~ about the loss of (it))												to feel bad about (it); to feel sorry about about the loss of (it)		< qivghu-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				qivghuke-	qivghuke-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qivghuli-	2bd4ekb-	feel bad (cause someone to ~ (especially over a loss))		atani qivghulii ullghitak naafqellukek \'91he made his father feel bad by breaking the snowmachine\'92; kelengakluki piteki qivghulikengellequsi \'91watch closely or you will cause someone to feel bad\'92													to cause someone to feel bad (especially over a loss)		< qiv3u-?-		CK A & W 93		qivghuli-	qivghuli-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1271 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 -\
qivghunagh-	2bd4eyf4-	sad (make one ~)		qivghunaghtuq \'91it makes one sad\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91it causes one to grieve\'92 /	grieve (cause one to ~)												to make one sad; to cause one ot grieve		< qivghu-nagh-				qivghunagh-	qivghunagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qivlegte-	2bdks[ns-	ransack		qivlegtaa \'91he ransacked it\'92 /	dig into things making a mess of them												to ransack; to dig into things making a mess of them						qivlegte-	qivlegte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qivraagh-	2bdh64-	complain		
\f2\i applies to men only;
\f0\i0  qivraaghtuq \'91he is griping\'92 /	fuss	gripe											to complain; to fuss; to gripe						qivragh-	qivrxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
Qiwaa, Qiwaaq	@b16. @b162	Kivak, former village in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Kivak, former village in Chukotka						Qiwa, Qiwaq	Qiwx, Qiwxq	\uc0\u1178 \u1080 \u1265 \u257 , \u1178 \u1080 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qiwaagh-	2b164-	shear short (of fur)		melqwa taaksagulluku qiwaaghluku atuumakanga \'91she cut the fur short and used it\'92													to be shear short (of fur)		< qigugh-?-		CK A & W 93		qiwagh-	qiwxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
Qiwaaghmii(t)	@b164v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan		< Qiwaaq-mii			xxxt	Qiwaghmi(t)	Qiwxghmx(t)	\u1178 \u1080 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
qiwaaghnga-	2b1643f-	short fur (have ~)		kaviiq naaptani ataasiq qiwaaghnganii melqwa \'91he said that one of the foxes he had trapped had short fur\'92													to have short fur		< qiwaagh-nga-				qiwaghnga-	qiwxghnga-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1187 \u1072 -\
qiya-	2bz-	cry (shed tears)		qiyaaq \'91he cried\'92 / qiyaaquq \'91he is crying\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he cries\'92; qiyanghituq \'91he didn\'92t cry\'92; qiyangigatuq \'91he is not crying\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he doesn\'92t cry\'92; qiyamaaq \'91he has or had been crying\'92; qiyakaaguq \'91he did cry\'92; 
\f2\i Qiyaghllagtuq
\f0\i0  aqniimaghmi. \'91She 
\f2\i cried
\f0\i0  loudly being hurt.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:204)													to cry (shed tears)		PE qi9a-				qiya-	qiya-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1103 -\
qiyaaghqe-	2b952s-	make one cry intentionally		qiyaaghqaa \'91he made her cry\'92 / mekelghiighhaam naani qiyaaghqaa atani tuqukaq pugleraneghmeng \'91the little boy caused his mother to cry by bringing up things about his dead father\'92													to intentionally make one cry		< qiya-?-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				qiyaghqe-	qiyxghqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qiyaaghwagh-	2b941f4-	cry very hard and long		qiyaaghwaghtuq \'91she cried her heart out\'92 /													to cry very hard and long		< qiya-?-				qiyaghwagh-	qiyxghwagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qiyamllagte-	2ezvk]f[ns-	whine		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 whimper												to whine; to whimper		< qiya-?-		CK Rub 274		qiyamllagte-	qiyamllagte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1103 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qiyanaruug-	2bzyfh8u-	annoyed or hurt (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  qiyanaruugpenang \'91don\'92t be annoyed or hurt; don\'92t feel like crying\'92	cry (feel like crying												to be annoyed or hurt; to feel like crying				CK Rub 274		qiyanarug-	qiyanarxg-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1088 \u1263 \u1075 -\
qiyengllegte-	2bqs3k]s[ns-	sob			cry lightly												to sob; to cry lightly		< qiya-?-		CK		qiyengllegte-	qiyengllegte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qiyiqe-	2bqb2s-	cry off and on over a period of time		taghnughhaq qiyiquq aqsalliqluni \'91the infant kept crying when it had a stomachache\'92; nanevgaq qiyiquq ilakwaani esghaghluku qavngaghhaaneng esghiigalkenni \'91the old man wept when he saw his relatives that he hadn't seen for a long time\'92	weep												to cry off and on over a period of time; to weep		< qiya-liqe-				qiyiqe-	qiyiqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1253 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qiyvagniqe-	2bdfuyb2s-	reach the limits															to reach the limits	lj[jlbnm lj rhfqyjcnb					qiyvagniqe-	qiyvagniqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qugaagpagni	2eu6[gfuyb	sour smell															sour smell		< qugaak-ghpak-ni\super 2				\nosupersub qugagpagni	qugxgpagni	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u257 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \
qugaagrugni	2eu6uheuyb	sour smell															sour smell		< qugaak-ghruk-ni\super 2				\nosupersub qugagrugni	qugxgrugni	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u257 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \
qugaak	2eu6r	sour flavor															sour flavor		PY-S qu!0l03-				qugak	qugxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u257 \u1082 \
qugagh-	2euf4-	hit hard			club (hit hard)	affix a knife or ax into a piece of wood											to club; hit hard; to affix a knife or ax into a piece of wood		PE qu!9a3-				qugagh-	qugagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qugaghsiigh-	2euf5c74-	chop wood for fuel															to chop wood for fuel		< qugagh-?-				qugaghsigh-	qugaghsxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\

\f1\b qugaghtaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2euf5nf2\'a1	anal itch															anal itch		PE qu!a3ta(3)				qugaghtaq1	qugaghtaq1	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b qugaghtaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2euf5nf2\'99	fish (type of small ~)		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 type of small fish						qugaghtaq2	qugaghtaq2	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 2\
qugake-	2eufrs-	pay attention 		qugakenghitaanguq iteghluni aleghqughyagu \'91they say he ignored her when she came in and talked to him\'92	attention (pay ~)	respond											to pay attention; to respond		< quga-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				qugake-	qugake-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
qugakesingwaagh-	2eufrscb3164-	ignore willfully		qugakesingwaaghaa \'91he's ignoring him\'92 /													to willfully ignore		< qugake-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -				qugakesingwagh-	qugakesingwxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
qugakigate-	2eufrbufns-	inattentive (be ~)			unresponsive (be ~)								Rub. adds \'91to be rude, to hate\'92 -- check				to be inattentive; to be unresponsive		< qugake-(ng)igate-				qugakigate-	qugakigate-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
quganagh-	2eufyf4-	disgraceful (be ~)		yugem quganaghyagutaa nukalpigaq qepghaghpenani sameng kiyaghtaataghyan \'91the man considered the youth to be disgraceful since he was always loafing and never working\'92									Rub. gives glosses \'91clumsy; plain; unsightly; ugly\'92 -- check				to be disgraceful						quganagh-	quganagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
quganaghhalek	2eufyf5fksr	disgraceful!		
\f2\i exclamatory particle	
\f0\i0 shameful!												how disgraceful!; how shameful!		< quganagh-ghhalek				quganaghhalek	quganaghhalek	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
quganakruggaghmeng	2eufyfrhe[f4vs3	how dare he!		
\f2\i exclamatory particle													
\f0\i0 how dare he!		< quganagh-?-
\f2\i ablative-modalis				
\f0\i0 quganakruggaghmeng	quganakruggaghmeng	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \
quganaqruggalek	2eufyf2ie[fksr	bad (what a ~ person!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle; Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 reckless (what a ~ person!)								check q or k (we have quganakruggaghmeng)				what a reckless person!; what a bad person!	\'f8djcrk>\uc0\u960  rfrjq ,tphfccelysq. \'e6[. gkj[jq			Rub. 286		quganaqruggalek	quganaqruggalek	\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1096 \u1091 \u1093 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
qugaqu-	2euf2e-	hit repeatedly			peck (of a bird)								check Rub.\'92s gloss \'91to hollow out\'92				to hit repeatedly; to peck (of a bird)		< qugagh-qu-				qugaqu-	qugaqu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
qugatagh-	2eufnf4-	hollow out		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; cf. qugagh- is \'91to hit hard\'92; qugaqu- is \'91to peck (of a bird)\'92; qugaqu- \'91to hollow out\'92				to hollow out	ljk,bnm	< qugagh-?-		Rub. 275		qugatagh-	qugatagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qugataq	2eufnf2	chisel		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 chisel				CK Rub 287		qugataq	qugataq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qugelngiq	2eusk3b2	mountain sorrel		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qugaak	sorel (mountain ~)	
\f2\i Oxyria digyna											
\f0\i0 mountain sorrel (Oxyria digyna)						qugelngiq	qugelngiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
qugeltaq	2eusk]nf2	dimple		qugeltalget ineghneghmeggni qugeltiit aliighaqut \'91those with dimples who smile, make their dimples show\'92													dimple				CK A & W 93 CK; Rub 276		qugeltaq	qugeltaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qugereghetaq	2eushs4snf2	wedge for splitting wood		ayumiq tugutmeng qugereghetaqluteng unaghsit quupegkayuwit \'91long ago they used walrus ivory for wedges to split wood\'92													wedge for splitting wood				CK A & W 93		qugereghetaq	qugereghetaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qugerngugh-	2eush3e4-	screech			yelp	smile frequently with laughter								coo (baby\'92s sound)			to screech; to yelp; to smile frequently with laughter; to coo (baby\'92s sound)	dbp;bn			CK V & E 145; A & W 97; Rub 276		qugerngugh-	qugerngugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qugesliipak	2eusck]7gfr	hoary redpoll			redpoll, hoary or common	
\f2\i Carduelis hornemanni 
\f0\i0 or
\f2\i  Carduelis flammea								
\f0\i0 common redpoll			hoary redpoll 
\f2\i (Carduelis hornemanni); 
\f0\i0 common redpoll 
\f2\i (Carduelis flammea)						
\f0\i0 qugeslipak	qugeslxpak	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
qugeyegte-	2eusqs[ns-	giggle quietly (in excitement)		sangameng aghnaghaat qugeyegtaqat? \'91why are the girls giggling quietly?\'92													to giggle quietly (in excitement)				CK A & W 93		qugeyegte-	qugeyegte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1253 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qughagh-	2e4f4-	dangle		qughaghtuq \'91it sagged\'92 / qughaghtaa \'91he let it hang\'92; atkuyaaghqek qukamegnekun piigllagluten enkaam qughaghllaglutek \'91her dress has a large rip in the waist so it sags quite a bit\'92; telephone-em wayii kepkaghluteng qughaghtuutut \'91the telephone wires are broken and dangling\'92	hang down	sag											to dangle; to hang down; to sag						qughagh-	qughagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qughaghtaq	2e4f5nf2	mat, hanging, made of grass used for insulatioon in a tent		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 qughaghtat,
\f2\i  for one such mat													
\f0\i0 hanging mat made of grass used for insulation in a tent		< qughagh-te\super 1\nosupersub -aq		CK Rub 277		qughaghtaq	qughaghtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qughalkutaq	2e4fk]renf2	earring															earring		< qughagh-?-qutaq				qughalkutaq	qughalkutaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qughaseketaq	2e4fcsrsnf2	hanging thing		upenghami mangtegham roof-ngan esnengi qughaseketiightaqut, qusukiightaqut \'91in the spring hanging icicles form at the bottom edge of roofs\'92													hanging thing		< qughah-?		CK A & W 93		qughaseketaq	qughaseketaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qughaseketiigh	2e4fcsrsn74-	dangle															to dangle		< qughagh-?-		VK		qughaseketigh	qughaseketxgh	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1251 \u1271 -\
qughlaa	2e4k9	syrup, commercial, \'93Karo\'94 brand or the like															"Karo" brand commercial syrup (or a similar syrup)		PE qu3li(C)a3 \'91slobber or tree sap\'92				qughla	qughlx	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \
qughri	2e4hb-	urine stain or residue															urine stain or residue		+ PE qu3$i \'91urine stain\'92 (under PE qu30-) (presently listed as PI qu3$in0q)		CK Rub 277		qughri	qughri	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1080 -\
qughriitaq	2e4h7nf2	grass, dried and bunched, used for personal hygiende		qughriitat kuuvelleghmun samun sangighquusit sivughaqluki \'91rags are used to wipe something that was spilled and then are wrung\'92	rag (especially one made of bunched grass)												bunched dried grass used for personal hygiene; rag (especially one made of bunched grass)		< qughri-(ng)itaq				qughritaq	qughrxtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qughru	2/4he	ten (the number ~ in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)		
\f2\i the entire jingle is:
\f0\i0  aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'	counting jingle (the number \'91ten\'92 in a ~ or finger naming jingle for children)	jingle (the number \'91ten\'92 in a counting or finger naming ~ for children)											the number ten (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)						qughru	qughru	\uc0\u1179 \u1102 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \
qughsatku	2e4cznre	polar bear, \'93king\'94		
\f2\i described as being furless around the ankles, having a solid rib cage and breast bone making it almost impossible to spear except in one spot on the front of the neck; called "king polar bear" in local English; 
\f0\i0 Alla tawaten naghaaghuteghllaglutenguq amaken Uygunaneng nanughllagem ivgaamaaki 
\f2\i qughsatkum
\f0\i0 . 
\f2\i Qughsatkum
\f0\i0  uugfikumakangi. Nanughllagem tuququumaa taghnughhaq tamaana. \'91One time they were playing and a big polar bear, a 
\f2\i king polar bear
\f0\i0 , came upon them from behind Point Uygunat.  The 
\f2\i king polar bear
\f0\i0   came up ashore going  over to them. The big polar bear killed all those children.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:62)	\'93king\'94 polar bear								see note in deR. 354				large polar bear; \'93king\'94 polar bear		from Chukchi q\'92ocatko \'91monster polar bear\'92 (note also PI qupqu3iaq (also Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik quqquyaq) \'91legendary giant polar bear\'92	04, 14			qughsatku	qughsatku	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1089 \u1103 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \
qugiikaq	2eubrf2	pickled food		ayveghem tengugi qugiisighat qugiikameng aatqut \'91pickled walrus liver is called pickled food\'92													pickled food				CK A & W 97		qugikaq	qugxkaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
qugiisigh-	2eu7cb4-	pickle or ferment meat															to pickle or ferment meat		< qugaak-i\super 2\nosupersub -sigh-		VK		qugisigh-	qugxsigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qugili-	2eubkb-	fat (get ~)		Kaangut uksaaghmi 
\f2\i qugilighllagaqelghiit
\f0\i0 . \'91The snow geese 
\f2\i get very fat 
\f0\i0 in the fall.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 70); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 quginaq, qugintagh-													to get fat		PE qu!i-		CK  Rub 276 CK 		qugili-	qugili-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 -\
qugina-	2eubyf-	ticklish		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  quginayugtuq \'91he feels ticklish\'92; quginankaa or quginayukaa \'91he feels tickeled by it\'92; quginayuketaq or qiginaketaq \'91one who is ticklish by nature\'92; quginanaq \'91something that is ticklish\'92; quginayugsaghaa \'91he is trying to make her feel ticklish with something (feather, fur, etc., not fingers)													ticklish		PE qu!ina!-				qugina-	qugina-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 -\
quginag-	2eubyfu-	terrified especially of the supernatural		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  quginagnaq \'91spooky thing, scarey thing, terrifying thing\'92; quginagyugtuq \'91he is terrified, spooked, scared\'92; quginakaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  quginagyukaa \'91he is terrified or spooked of it\'92; quginaketaq \'91one who is easily frightened or spooked\'92	spooked	scared											terrified especially of the supernatural; spooked; scared		PE qu!ina!-				quginag-	quginag-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 -\
quginaq	2eubyf2	fat		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qugintagh-, qugili-	blubber												fat; blubber		PE qu!i-				quginaq	quginaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
qugintagh-	2eubynf4-	fat (be ~)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 quginaq, qugili-													to be fat		PE qu!i-				qugintagh-	qugintagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qugneq	2euys2	crack in shore ice		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 qugneghek
\f2\i , for one crack													
\f0\i0 crack in shore ice	nhtobyf dj kmle e ,thtuf			CK V & E 25; Rub 276		qugneq	qugneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qugtuqaghmig-	2e[ne2f4vbu-	put into the baggy leg of old-fashioned bloomers with drawstrings at the knee															to put into the baggy leg of old-fashioned bloomers with drawstrings at the knee		< qugtuqaq-mig-				qugtuqaghmig-	qugtuqaghmig-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
qugtuqaghmik	2e[ne2f4vbr	thing put into the baggy leg of old-fashioned bloomers with drawstrings at the knee															thing put into the baggy leg of old-fashioned bloomers with drawstrings at the knee		< qugtuqaq-mik				qugtuqaghmik	qugtuqaghmik	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
qugtuqaq	2e[ne2f2	thigh															thigh		PE qu!tuqa3				qugtuqaq	qugtuqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
qukaayug-	2er6/u-	boast		
\f2\i literally:
\f0\i0  to want to be the center (of attention)													to boast		< qukaq-(ng)u-yug-				qukayug-	qukxyug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u257 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qukaghite-	2erf4bns-	get to the center		naayghamun mayulghii qukaghilluni meghnaalimalghii \'91when he was climbing the mountain and got halfway up, he rested\'92; laawaaghmun qukaghilluku unaghsiq napaghlluku peghunakesi \'91place the stick upright in the center of the dug out hole and bury it\'92	place in the center	reach the middle											to get or place to the center of something; to reach the middle		< qukaq-qite- (?)		CK A & W 94 CK		qukaghite-	qukaghite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qukaghmii	2erf4v7	man in whaling boat who throws out the second float															man in whaling boat who throws out the second float		< qukaq-mii				qukaghmi	qukaghmx	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 \
qukaghte-	2erf5ns-	halfway through (be ~)		qukaghlluku glass-a imighhu! \'91fill the glass halfway!\'92; Palighvik qukaghtuq \'91August is half through\'92	fill halfway	middle of a time span (be at the ~)											to be halfway through; to fill halfway; to be at the middle of a time span (day, month, year, etc.)	yfgjkyzncz lj gjkjdbys	< qukaq-te\super 2\nosupersub -		CK V & E 138 (Russ voc)		qukaghte-	qukaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qukaghun	2erf4ey	band (narrow beaded ~ for amulets formerly worn around the waist by women)															narrow beaded band for amulets formerly worn around the waist by women		< qukaghte-(u)n				qukaghun	qukaghun	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
qukaq	2erf2	middle		qukaani \'91in the middle of it\'92	center	waist								back, lower part			middle; center; waist; lower back		PE quka3				qukaq	qukaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
qukaqliq	2erf2kb2	middle one															middle one	chtlybq	< qukaq-qliq		CK V & E 114		qukaqliq	qukaqliq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
qukasalegh-	2erfcfks4-	middle (be or hit right in the ~)		Unaghsiq qalqalimaluku petgeghviklunga taatka 
\f2\i qukasaleghluku
\f0\i0  sukisimalghiinga. \'91While I was chopping wood, a piece shot to my forehead, leaving a sliver 
\f2\i right in the middle
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SULUWET 109)													to be or hit right in the middle		< qukaq-?-				qukasalegh-	qukasalegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
qukfighte-, qukfightagh-	2erab5ns-. 2erab5nf4-	part the hair and pull back each half  behind the ears		igat qukfightaghluki yuvghiighii \'91she went through the pages and looked at it\'92	open a book flat 												to part the hair and pull back each half behind the ears; to open a book flat 		PY qukvi3-				qukfighte-, qukfightagh-	qukfighte-, qukfightagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -, \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qukfighun	2erab4ey	barret for hair															barret for hair						qukfighun	qukfighun	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
qukfighute-	2erab4ens-	wake (make a V-shaped ~ (when a boat moves across the water))		angyat igleghsalghiimeng qukfighutut \'91when the boat traveled, it left a V-shaped wake\'92													to make a V-shaped wake (when a boat moves across the water)		< qukfigh-(u)te-		CK A & W 94 CK		qukfighute-	qukfighute-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qukiinaani	2er7y6yb	unimportant		
\f2\i particle (?);
\f0\i0  tengegkayuk aqumutiiskan qukiinaani pinghisaghngaaghmi ayuquq \'91if the airplane doesn\'92t have any available seats, it doesn\'92t matter if he goes or not\'92; ullghitagni aghyuqak qukiinaani naavyaghqngaayek lliighumaak \'91he doesn\'92t care if his snowmachine breaks because it\'92s so old\'92	doesn\'92t matter one way or the other												unimportant; doesn\'92t matter one way or the other				CK A & W 94		qukinani	qukxnxni	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1251 \u1085 \u257 \u1085 \u1080 \
qula2	2ekf\'99	whip		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 whip				CK Rub 280		qula2	qula2	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1072 2\
qulae1	2ekzs\'a1	uper part		
\f2\i the numbers eleven through fourteen and sixteen through nineteen are based on 
\f0\i0 qula \'91ten\'92: qula ataasiq siipneqluku \'91eleven\'92, qula maalghuk siipneqlukek \'91twelve\'92; qula pingayut siipneqluki \'91thirteen\'92, qula estamat siipneqluki \'91fourteen\'92, qula aghvinlek siipneqluku \'91sixteen\'92, qula maaghraghvinlek siipneqluku \'91seventeen\'92, qula pingayuneng inglulek siipneqluku \'91eighteen\'92, qula estamaneng inglulek siipneqluku \'91nineteen\'92; 
\f2\i examples of various uses of 
\f0\i0 qula: naaygham quulnga paagna tagitugem saapaqaa \'91the upper part of that mountain up there is obscured by the fog\'92; qulangiilluku neghaqluten \'91eat with something right below your food\'92; quulvani \'91up high\'92, quulmun \'91upwards\'92; qulanganeng 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  quulnganeng \'91from above\'92; qulaneng qikmilguuq \'91he has ten dogs\'92; Mangteghami whani 
\f2\i qula
\f0\i0  ayumiqulleq kiyaghtunga. \'91I lived in this house for 
\f2\i ten
\f0\i0  years.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 80); 
\f2\i Qula
\f0\i0  angyaq angyaghuutuq. \'91
\f2\i Ten
\f0\i0  boats went out hunting.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 144)	above (area ~)	gunwale of boat								ten (the number ~)			upper part; area above; gunwale of boat; (the number) ten		 PE qul0-			> qulighneq, quliiwhtaq, quleghtaq, quulngughuta(e), quulqin, qulqite-	qulae1	qulae1	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 1\
qulaghwaaghite-	2ekf4164bns-	spendthrift (be a ~)		ulimaaghmeng tukfightulghii qulaghwaaghituq \'91the one buying ivory carvings doesn\'92t care how much they cost\'92; qulaghwaaghitutmineng sangwaa alngunak pilaghaa \'91on account of his spendthrift ways, he bought whatever he wanted\'92													to be a spendthrift		< qula-?-		CK A & W 94		qulaghwaghite-	qulaghwxghite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
quleghtaq	2eks5nf2	tarp fastened around gunwale of boat to keep water out			spray skirt												tarp fastened around gunwale of boat to keep water out; spray skirt		< qula-?-				quleghtaq	quleghtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qulighneq	2ekb4ys2	upper part															upper part		< qula-lighneq				qulighneq	qulighneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qulighuraak	2ekb4eh6r	side rail of sled															side rail of sled				SLI Cur. Man. 42		qulighurak	qulighurxk	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
qulighwaaq	2ekb4162	strip, single, of decoration on the bottom of  a snow shirt		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 single strip of decoration on the bottom of  a snow shirt		< qula-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK Rub 280		qulighwaq	qulighwxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b qulighyak\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2ekb4]zr\'a1	red phalarope			phalarope, red	
\f2\i Phalaropus fulicarius											
\f0\i0 red phalarope 
\f2\i (Phalaropus fulicarius)				
\f0\i0 CK V & E 54; Yatta		qulighyak1	qulighyak1	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 1\

\f1\b qulighyak\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2ekb4]zr\'99	broth made from the liquid used when sealskin is processed to remove hair		ayumiq itagsim sameng neqmeng entaqunllu egtiirakangigalnguut qulighyak ulimaaqegkangat \'91long ago they probably made edible broth from the liquid used in processing sealskin to remove hair\'92													broth made from the liquid used when sealskin is processed to remove hair				CK A & W 94		qulighyak2	qulighyak2	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 2\
quliiwhtaq	2ek71]nf2	tarp fastened around gunwale of boat to keep water out		
\f2\i may be used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 quliiwhtat,
\f2\i  for one such tarp	
\f0\i0 spray skirt												tarp fastened around gunwale of boat to keep water out; spray skirt		< qula-?				quliwhtaq	qulxwhtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1265 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qulite-	2ekbns-	wash one\'92s hair		qulituq \'91she is washing her (own) hair\'92; qulitaa \'91she is washing her (another's) hair\'92 /													to wash one\'92s hair		PE qulit-				qulite-	qulite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qulleghrak	2ek]s4hfr	walrus skin used to cover a summer house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 walrus skin used to cover a summer house				CK Rub 282		qulleghrak	qulleghrak	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
qullig-	2ek]bu-	put on pants		qulligtuq \'91he put pants on (himself)\'92; qulligaa \'91he put pants on him (another)\'92 /	pants (put on ~)												to put on pants						qullig-	qullig-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1075 -\
qulligek	2ek]busr	pants		
\f2\i this a dual; the singular would be 
\f0\i0 qullik; 
\f2\i the term 
\f0\i0 qulligek 
\f2\i refers especially or traditionally to inner pants of reindeer skin; 
\f0\i0 qulligegka \'91my pants\'92; qullilguuq \'91he has pants\'92; qulligightuq \'91he took off his pants\'92	trousers												pants	,h/rb> infys	PE qa3(u)@i!				qulligek	qulligek	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1075 \u1099 \u1082 \
qulligpagek	2ek]b[gfusr	snow-pants		
\f2\i this is a dual; the singular would be
\f0\i0  qulligpak	overpants, padded												snow-pants; padded overpants		< qullik-ghpak				qulligpagek	qulligpagek	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1082 \
qullikaq	2ek]brf2	glacier avens (edible root)			avens, glacier (edible root)	
\f2\i Geum glaciale								Novosieversia flacias			
\f0\i0 edible root of glacier avens (
\f2\i Geum glaciale or Novosieversia flacias
\f0\i0 )				2nd gloss from Aynganga\'92s \'93Beringia\'94 article		qullikaq	qullikaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
qullingestaq	2ek]b3scnf2	woman\'92s tights		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 qullingestak, 
\f2\i for one pair of tights	
\f0\i0 tights (woman\'92s ~)												woman\'92s tights		< qullik-ngestaq		CK Rub 281		qullingestaq	qullingestaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qullipigek	2ek]bgbusr	skin pants in contrast to cloth pants		
\f2\i this is a dual; the singular would be 
\f0\i0 qullipik	pants, skin, (in contrast to cloth pants)												skin pants in contrast to cloth pants		< qullik-pik				qullipigek	qullipigek	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1099 \u1082 \
qulliraaghek	2ek]bh64sr	cloth pants in contrast to skin pants		
\f2\i this is a dual; the singular would be 
\f0\i0 qulliraaq	pants, cloth (in contrast to skin pants)												cloth pants in contrast to skin pants		< qullik-raaq				qulliraghek	qullirxghek	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 \u1099 \u1082 \
qulluk	2ek]/r	commode		
\f2\i the meaning
\f0\i0  \'91motor well\'92 
\f2\i is Chukotkan; also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  qullugek, 
\f2\i  for one commode or motor well	
\f0\i0 \'93honey bucket\'94	motor well in boat											commode; \'93honey bucket\'94; motor well in boat						qulluk	qulluk	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
qulmesighaq	2ekvscb4f2	pot\'92s worth or quantity of tomcot		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the plural 
\f0\i0 qulmesighat	tomcod (a pot\'92s worth or quantity of ~)												a pot\'92s worth or quantity of tomcot				CK Rub 280		qulmesighaq	qulmesighaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b qulmesiin\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2ekvsc7y\'a1	pot, small with handle		Igaasitaq taana nanim ellngaatanganeng, 
\f2\i qulmesiitem
\f0\i0  puyaaneng akuutkameng imalek tagnepiglleghhiimeng. \'91The paintpot was filled with the dregs from an oil lamp mixed with soot from a 
\f2\i cooking pot
\f0\i0 , all very black.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:222) 	saucepan	cooking pot, small											small cooking pot with a handle; saucepan		PE qul0mci3un				qulmesin1	qulmesxn1	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1085 1\

\f1\b qulmesiin\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2ekvsc7y\'99	sea urchin			urchin (sea ~)	
\f2\i Strongylocentrotus sp.											
\f0\i0 sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus sp.)						qulmesin2	qulmesxn2	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1085 2\
qulmesiitngwaaq	2ekvsc7n3]162	sea urchin		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 urchin (sea ~)	
\f2\i Strongylocentrotus sp.											
\f0\i0 sea urchin 
\f2\i (Strongylocentrotus sp.)		
\f0\i0 < qulmesiin-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK Rub 280		qulmesitngwaq	qulmesxtngwxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
qulqesaati-	2ek]2sc6nb-	place a pot of food right above the flame to cook it quickly		qulqesaalluki aatkat kinengyugnaghqiteki \'91place the clothes right above the stove so they can dry quickly\'92; qulmesiin qulqesaalluku nanimun gaaragkiightuq \'91the pot was placed right above the lamp and it quickly cooked\'92	place wet clothing right above the flame to dry it quickly												to place a pot of food right above the flame to cook it quickly; to place wet clothing right above the flame to dry it quickly		< qula-?-		CK A & W 94		qulqesati-	qulqesxti-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u257 \u1090 \u1080 -\
qulqesaghqe-	2ek]2scf52s-	get to the area above (it)		ayveq kaalluku qulqesaghqelluku naghullgaa \'91they got to the walrus, the striker got right above it and cast the harpoon at it\'92													to get to the area above (it)		< qula-?-		CK A & W 94		qulqesaghqe-	qulqesaghqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qulqisiigh-	2ek]2bc74-	elevate something from ground or floor		nunaaghmi qavaghnaqngami qulqisiighluni ingaghsimalghii \'91when was going to sleep at camp, he made a make-shift bed and went to bed\'92; llivelghaghqameng qulqisiighluteng llilaghtuumalghiit \'91they made a shelf above the floor and placed stuff on it\'92	raise												to elevate something from ground or floor; to raise		< qula-?-		CK A & W 94		qulqisigh-	qulqisxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
qulqite-	2ek]2bns-	reach the top or the upper level		= quulqite-	top (reach the ~)	upper level (reach the ~)											to reach the top or the upper level		< qula-qite-				qulqite-	qulqite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
quma	2evf	intestinal worm			worm, intestinal	tapeworm											intestinal worm; tapeworm		PE quma(3)				quma	quma	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \
qumig-	2evbu-	put inside front of parka															to put inside front of parka		PE qumi!-				qumig-	qumig-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
qumigagh-	2evbuf4-	climb pole using the legs		unaghsiq napaghngalghii qumigameng mayughaa \'91he climbed a pole that was upright\'92	shinny up pole												to climb pole using the legs; to shinny up a pole				CK A & W 95		qumigagh-	qumigagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qumik	2evbr	thing carried inside parka or coat			carried thing inside parka or coat	fetus											thing carried inside parka or coat; fetus		PE qumi!-				qumik	qumik	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
qumikesegagh-	2evbrscsuf4-	sit with legs folded		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)									
\f0\i0 check english translation				to sit with legs folded	cblbnm. gjl;fd yjub			CK V & E 164		qumikesegagh-	qumikesegagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
quminge-	2evb3s-	pregnant (become ~)															to become pregnant		< qumik-nge-				quminge-	quminge-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1187 \u1099 -\
Qumlangilquq	@evkz3bk]2e2	Koomlangeelkuk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Koomlangeelkuk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		< ? - (ng)ite-quq (?)				Qumlangilquq	Qumlangilquq	\uc0\u1178 \u1091 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
qumsegte-	2evcs[ns-	close legs, scissors, jack knife, window, door or other hinged pair of things		qumsegtuq \'91he put his legs together\'92; pumsukegtaatek qumsegtaak \'91he put the blades of the scissors together\'92; iiymineng qumsegutaanga \'91he winked at me (with his eye)\'92	wink												to close legs, scissors, jack knife, window, door or other hinged pair of things; to wink		PE qu9umi!- (under PE qu9u-)				qumsegte-	qumsegte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qumsekegte-	2evcsrs[ns-	pinched (get one's fingers or other body part or other thing ~ between two things)		qumsekegtaanga kumlumkun taam amigkun umegluku \'91he got my thumb caught closing the door\'92													to get one's fingers or other body part or other thing pinched between two things		< qumsegte-kegte-				qumsekegte-	qumsekegte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qunagh-	2eyf4-	dead		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  qunaghtuq \'91he closed his eyes\'92; qunaghmi igleghtuq \'91he is walking around with his eyes closed\'92; qunaamsiighwaghtuq \'91he has his eyes partly closed or keeps closing them\'92, \'91he closed his eyes (napped) for a while\'92; qunaghngaaq \'91his eyes are closed\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is dead\'92 
\f2\i (euphemism)
\f0\i0 ; = qunegh-	eyes closed	close eyes											eyes closed; dead						qunagh-	qunagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qunegh-	2eys4-	dead		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  quneghtuq \'91he closed his eyes\'92; qunaghmi igleghtuq \'91he is walking around with his eyes closed\'92;  \'93
\f2\i Quneghten
\f0\i0 , esghaghhaaten apeghiiqumken.\'94 Aqumuq meteghlluk uyghagem saaghwakun, 
\f2\i quneghtuq
\f0\i0 . \'91\'91
\f2\i Close your eyes
\f0\i0 , you can look at it, when I\'92m done with you.\'94 The raven sat down on the side of the rock, and 
\f2\i closed
\f0\i0  his eyes.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 27); quneghngaaq \'91his eyes are closed\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is dead\'92 
\f2\i (euphemism)
\f0\i0 ; = qunagh-	eyes closed	close eyes											eyes closed; dead						qunegh-	qunegh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 -\
qunengllagh-	2eys3k]f4-	rock to sleep		aghnaghaghhaam uyughaghhani qunengllaghaqaa \'91the girl is rocking her younger sibling to sleep\'92													to rock to sleep		< qunegh-ngllagh-		CK Rub 282		qunengllagh-	qunengllagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qunereng	2eyshs3	furthermore		
\f2\i particle; may have the implication of something being unsatisfactory or insufficient;
\f0\i0  aghsaan qunereng mekestaaghhaghmeng tuuniinkut ikellesqughaq mangtak \'91moreover he gave us such a tiny slice of whale meat\'92; Getgam piiqaanga, "Nallaghaq 
\f2\i qunereng
\f0\i0  Sivuqami uksughtekayuk. Nasani efsikigalkanga. Nasaghwaaghllak iiwleng." \'91Getga was saying to me, \'93
\f2\i Furthermore
\f0\i0  Nallaghaq can spend the winters in Gambell. He doesn\'92t get tired of (wearing) his parka hood. He always has hood on.\'94\'92 (PANGEGH. 40)	moreover												furthermore; moreover		from Chukchi qon0r0 \'91since, because\'92				qunereng	qunereng	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1187 \

\f1\b qunga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2e3f\super s	\nosupersub midst or middle		nem qungangakun mangteghangllaghtukut \'91we built our house in the middle of town\'92; sangwaa quungkutanga nallukaghput \'91we don't know what the source of the talk is\'92	core or source	main idea								center			the midst; the middle of an area; main idea; center; source; core						qungae	qungae	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
qungangiite-	2e3f37ns-	reach the center		uyghagamunllu iiwenllu qungangiitaquq tengegkayuget paga naghughtut \'91as he was coming to the middle of the rocky area, an airplane passed by\'92; legan taawa qungangiitngwaaghluni lliightuq Ungazighmiinun ima tamaavek tagiyuggaalleghmineng \'91he is really becoming accustomed to being among the Ungaziq people now compared to how he was when he first came there some time ago\'92	acculturate												to reach the center; to acculturate		< qunga-igh-(u)te-				qungangite-	qungangxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qungeghruk	2e3s4her	upper part of back near neck		neghsam qungeghruggiinaan amiiraa iikluku atuumakanga \'91she took off the upper part of the back of a sealskin and used it\'92; qikmighaq qungeghruggakun tuguluku ananusimakanga \'91he picked up the puppy by the upper part of its back and took it out\'92													upper part of back near neck				CK A & W 95		qungeghruk	qungeghruk	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
qungeghruk	2e3s4he4	neck (lower back of ~)		Teghigluget esgha repall 
\f2\i qungeghrugi
\f0\i0  aliighaqut qenughhaghavleghaghmi maalkam angtalanganeng. \'91But the young bearded seals were coming up with their 
\f2\i backs
\f0\i0  showing through the surface of the thin slush ice.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:154)	back (upper part of ~)												lower back of neck; upper part of back		< qunguq-ruk; PE qu&03		VK		qungeghruk	qungeghruk	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1271 \
qungeliqaq	2e3skb2f2	pirog (Russian style stuffed pastry)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 pirog (Russian style stuffed pastry)				CK Rub 284		qungeliqaq	qungeliqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
qungevagh-	2e3sdf4-	go further inwards or inland		angyat mellaatkat wata qungevaatii \'91the boat that was closed in by the ice went further into the ice\'92; amiiqaq qungevaqwaaqun putulaghnaken sevnayukan \'91make the holes on the walrus skin further in towards the center lest they tear\'92													to go further inwards or inland		< qunga\super e\nosupersub -vagh-		CK A & W 95		qungevagh-	qungevagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qungevaq	2e3sdf2	inland area			inward area												inward or inland area		< qunga\super e\nosupersub -vagh-		VK		qungevaq	qungevaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
qungllaagh-	2e3k]64-	part the hair in the middle		sivukluku nuyaa qungllaaghluku taqughtaa \'91first she parted her hair and then braided it\'92; enraq sanivaqaaqun qungllaaghumayaqanga \'91she made the part in hair too far on the side however\'92; naasqum qukaakun qunglaaghaqiit \'91they part them on the center of the head\'92													to part the hair in the middle				CK A & W 95		qungllagh-	qungllxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1271 -\
qungllaaq	2e3k]62	part in center of hair															part in center of hair				CK A & W 95		qungllaq	qungllxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1179 \
qunglug-	2e3k/u-	submerge (of seals, walrus, people)															to submerge (of seals, walrus, people)						qunglug-	qunglug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -\
qungragaghte-	2e3hfuf5ns-	chip		Ulimaaqa igarutaaghluku 
\f2\i qungragaghtaqa
\f0\i0 . \'91I 
\f2\i chipped
\f0\i0  my carving drilling a hole in it.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 145)	crack	split											to chip; to crack; to split						qungragaghte-	qungragaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1088 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qungsig-	2e3cbu-	split easily for thread making (of sinew)		natelnguum emta ivalungi qungsigniiqiit \'91they say a certain sinew is easy to split\'92; qungsilghiimeng ivalungnaqutkaqelghiin\'92nguq \'91they say they try to get got sinew that is easy to split\'92													to be easily split for thread making (of sinew)				CK A & W 95		qungsig-	qungsig-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 -\
qungsugh-	2e3c/4-	rest after giving birth with one's legs flexed and upper body bent over them															to rest after giving birth with one's legs flexed and upper body bent over them		PE qu&cu3-				qungsugh-	qungsugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\
qungugh-	2e3e4-	bury			inter												to bury; to inter		PE qu&u3(-)				qungugh-	qungugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qungughaq 	2e3e4f2	cemetary		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 cemetery		< qunguq-ghaq				qungughaq 	qungughaq 	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qungughnagh-	2e3e4yf4-	downcast (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf. 
\f0\i0 qungughte-	joyless (be ~)								check this; is there an emotional root qungagh-?				to be downcast, joyless	gjyehsq. ytdtctksq			Rub. 284		qungughnagh-	qungughnagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qungughte-	2e3e5ns-	hang one's head down		qungtaghaa \'91put your head and shoulders down a little\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qunguq; qungughnagh-	rest forehead on crossed arms												to hang one's head down; to rest forehead on crossed arms						qungughte-	qungughte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qungughvik	2e3e4dbr	grave			cemetery												grave; cemetery		< qungugh-vik				qungughvik	qungughvik	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
qunguq	2e3e2	scruff of neck		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qungughte-	back (top of ~)	neck (scruff of ~)											scruff of neck; top of back		PE qu&03				qunguq	qunguq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
Qunguvak	2e3edfr	Ittygran Island (site in Chukotka on ~)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka, on Ittygran Island				Men. 1972, 1975		qunguvak	qunguvak	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
qungvughaq*	2e3de4f2	minke whale			whale (minke ~)	
\f2\i Balaenoptera acutorostrata											
\f0\i0 minke whale (Balaenoptera acutorostrata)						qungvughaq*	qungvughaq*	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1074 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
qungyagh-	2e3mz4-	jealous (be ~)		qungyaghtuq \'91he is jealous or envious\'92 / qungyaatkaa \'91he is envious on account of it\'92; 
\f2\i applies to jealousy concerning man-woman relations and jealousy or envy for other reasons as well;
\f0\i0  Atilqa Private Mate-nguuq. Taakut 
\f2\i qungyaghnayukata
\f0\i0  umiilgataghaghpigaat. \'91My title was Private Mate. I feared least the others  become 
\f2\i jealous
\f0\i0   due to the promotion.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:146)	envious (be ~)												to be envious; to be jealous		PE qu&ya3-				qungyagh-	qungyagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
qungyaghtaq	2e3mz5nf2	jealous person			envious person												jealous or envious person		< qungyagh-taq\super \'a2				\nosupersub qungyaghtaq	qungyaghtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
qungyaghuq	2e3]z4e2	walrus (upper back and neck area of a bull ~ that has lots of bumps)		quyngyagughtuqat mangunat qetustaaghhaaniiqiit \'91they say the really bumpy parts of a bull walrus are tender													the upper back and neck area of a bull walrus that has lots of bumps				CK A & W 95		qungyaghuq	qungyaghuq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 \
qungyallek	2e3]zk]sr	boat (area of ~ around stern)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 stern area of boat												area of boat around stern				CK Rub 284		qungyallek	qungyallek	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \
qungyaqe-, qungyake-	2e3mz2s-. 2e3mzrs-	envious of (him)		qungyaqaa \'91he is envious of her\'92 /	jealous of (him)												to be envious or jealous of (him)		< qungyagh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				qungyaqe-, qungyake-	qungyaqe-, qungyake-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 -, \u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 -\
quni	2eyb	teardrop		quningi \'91his tears\'92; quni atuqaa aghnam qivghumam \'91the woman is shedding lots of tears due to being sad\'92	tear(dropt)												tear; teardrop		PE quni! and qulvi				quni	quni	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \
quniluugte-	2eybk0[ns-	teary-eyed (become ~)		mekelghiighhaq quniluugteghllagtuq \'91the little boy is becoming covered with tears on his face\'92	tears (get tears all over one\'92s face)												to become teary-eyed; to get tears all over one\'92s face		< quni-?-				qunilugte-	qunilxgte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qunqalleg-	2ey2fk]su-	wink		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  quunqagh-	blink												to blink						qunqalleg-	qunqalleg-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 -\
qunqavyugte-	2ey2fd/[ns-	squint															to squint						qunqavyugte-	qunqavyugte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1074 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qupak	2egfr	beads (girl\'92s hair ~)		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  qupaget, 
\f2\i for one whole set consisting of an ivory button worn near the top of a braid with strings of beads attached to it and looping down the braid; 
\f0\i0 qupagenka \'91my hairbeads\'92									check length of a; Rub. has it long.				girl's hair beads		PE qupa!				qupak	qupak	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
qupasqiq	2egfc2b2	earring		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 earring	cth]ub d eif[	< qupak-?		CK V & E  92		qupasqiq	qupasqiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \
qupayuqaq	2egf/2f2	prickly thing		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 sharp thing								check				prickly, sharp thing	rjkrbq			Rub. 285		qupayuqaq	qupayuqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
qupe-	2egs-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > quupe, qupugh-, quperghu-, quperghuugh-															PE qup0-				qupe-	qupe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 -\
qupeq	2egs2	reflection of ice on clouds above seen from far away		angyat qupengyaalluteng siku kaasimakangat upenghami nunavagtuqaq \'91the boat went to the place indicated by the ice blink, the reflection of ice on the clouds, in spring and it had lots of walrus\'92	ice blink												ice blink; reflection of ice on clouds above seen from far away				CK A & W 96 CK		qupeq	qupeq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \
quperghu-	2egsh4e-	cut alongside a small part of something		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to cut alongside a small part of something		< qupe-?		CK Rub 286		quperghu-	quperghu-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1271 \u1091 -\
quperghuugh-	2egsh484-	decorate front of sealskin water boots with narrow strips of bleached sealskin with waterproof seams		= qeperghuugh-													to decorate front of sealskin water boots with narrow strips of bleached sealskin with waterproof seams		< qupe-?-				quperghugh-	quperghxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1271 \u1263 \u1271 -\
qupigh-	2egb4-	hair beads (put on ~)		aghnaghaat quliquuluteng qupightuusimalghiit \'91the girls washed their hairs and put beads on the hair as they braided it\'92													to put on hair beads		< qupak-ligh-		CK A & W 		qupigh-	qupigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1271 -\
qupneq	2egy]s2	whitefish			Bering Cisco	Cisco, Bering								
\f2\i Coregonus laurettae			
\f0\i0 whitefish; Bering Cisco 
\f2\i (Coregonus laurettae)		
\f0\i0 cf. PE qupn03 (under qup0-)				qupneq	qupneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
quprughaghaq	2egie4f4f2	clam, small		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; cf. 
\f0\i0 quprughaq													small clam						quprughaghaq	quprughaghaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1096 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
quprughaq	2egie4f2	horned puffin			puffin, horned	
\f2\i Fratercula corniculata											
\f0\i0 horned puffin (Fratercula corniculata)						quprughaq	quprughaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1096 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
quprughneq	2egie4ys2	walrus, old barren female															old barren female walrus						quprughneq	quprughneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1096 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qupugh-	2ege4-	split more than one thing															to split more than one thing		< qupe-ugh-				qupugh-	qupugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qupughhagh-	2ege5f4-	wet and stringy (have one\'92s hair become ~)		qikmighhaq qupughhaghaa pugimaghluni \'91the little dog's hair got wet and stringy after it swam\'92													to have one's hair become wet and stringy		< qupugh-ghhaq				qupughhagh-	qupughhagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qupughhugh-	2ege5e4-	cut or split lengthwise		qamiskani pilagtumeng qupughhughaqeftaa \'91he was apparently cutting wood into strips for his sled\'92; qupughhuusikun sukalluku qupughhuumaa \'91he cut it fast with a ripsaw\'92	rip (cut with the grain)												to cut or split lengthwise; to rip (cut with the grain)				CK A & W 96		qupughhugh-	qupughhugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1091 \u1203 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qupughragh-	2ege4hf4-	strips (to split or cut into ~)															to split or cut into strips		< qupugh-ragh-				qupughragh-	qupughragh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qupuma	2egevf	woman (shaman\'92s word)		
\f2\i Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0 qupumannguq qerngughunnaqut \'91the women are about to get together\'92									according to Ayveghhaq in Menovshchikov (1988) this is the word for woman in the \'93devil\'92s\'94 language; this is also mentioned in Bogoras				woman (shaman\'92s word)		< qupe-(i/u)ma-		CK A & W 96 CK 		qupuma	qupuma	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \
quq-quq	2e2-2e2	signal to warn of animals appearing from water		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 is this good?				a signal to warn of animals appearing from water				CK Rub 278		quq-quq	quq-quq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1179 -\u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
quqighnagh-	2e2e4yf4-	peppy (be ~)		basketball-esta quqighnaatmineng aangqameng kanaghqughtuq \'91the basketball player kept on making baskets due to his being so peppy\'92	energy (be full of ~)												to be peppy; to be full of energy				CK A & W 96		quqighnagh-	quqighnagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
quqiigh-	2e274-	attract the attention of a passerby by putting a stick up through the ceiling ventilator and making noise															to attract the attention of a passerby by putting a stick up through the ceiling ventilator and making noise						quqigh-	quqxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \u1251 \u1271 -\
quqiiq	2e272	dovekie			
\f2\i Alle alle												
\f0\i0 dovekie (Alle alle)						quqiq	quqxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \u1251 \u1179 \
ququngaq	2e2e3f2	leaf, edible, of low-bush willow			willow (edible leaf of low-bush ~
\f2\i  (Salix pulchra))	Salix pulchra 
\f0\i0 leaf								tea			leaf; edible leaf of low-bush willow
\f2\i  (Salix pulchra); 
\f0\i0 tea		PY ququ&aq, or from Chukchi qoqo&al!0n \'91willow\'92 if this Chukchi word is itself a loan from Eskimo	07	the \'91tea\'92 gloss if from SLI JR. DICT. 145		ququngaq	ququngaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \
quragnaq	2ehfuyf2	slow person		esghaqaaluni quragnaq sehleghlluguftuq piyalghiimi \'91he looked like an inactive person but turned out to be pretty good and efficient\'92	passive person	inactive person											slow, inactive or passive person				CK A & W 96		quragnaq	quragnaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
qurgu	2ehue	pine, dwarf Siberian		
\f2\i Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0 = qergu	dwarf Siberian pine	
\f2\i Pinus cembra							
\f0\i0 check exact species				dwarf Siberian pine 
\f2\i (Pinus cembra)		
\f0\i0 from Chukchi q0r!oq0r, pl. q0r!ot \'91dwarf Siberian pine\'92	07, 14			qurgu	qurgu	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1088 \u1075 \u1091 \
qurimti	2ehbvnb	rock used (as balast?) to secure a boat from wind		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rock used (as balast?) to secure a boat from wind				CK Rub 286		qurimti	qurimti	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1088 \u1080 \u1084 \u1090 \u1080 \
qurughneq	2ehe4ys2	bundle of dried fish															bundle of dried fish				VK\'92s notes		qurughneq	qurughneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1088 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qusak	2eczr	crack (as in tusk), thin, caused by dryness, pressure, etc.		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 qusagek, 
\f2\i for one crack; 
\f0\i0 Llangaqa tugutem 
\f2\i qusagkek
\f0\i0  unaaghniineng avlelghiik. \'91It looks as though the 
\f2\i crack
\f0\i0  on the tusk is wider than it was this morning.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 85)													thin crack (as in tusk) caused by dryness, pressure, etc.						qusak	qusak	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
qusevegnagh-	2epsdsuyf4-	humble (be ~)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qusevegte-	modest (be ~)												to be modest or humble				CK A & W 96		qusevegte-	qusevegte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1079 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
qusevegte-	2eceds[ns-	humble (be ~)		qusevegneghet yuget sameng seghleghmeng qingaakulluteng kiyaghtaaghet, yukeghqegpenateng \'91modest or humble people dislike wrong-doing and do not act conceited\'92; Tamaakut 
\f2\i qusevegngalghiit
\f0\i0  quyastellelguut, qayughllak Kiyaghneghem tuunyaghqaqaa nuna ellngitnun. \'91Blessed are the 
\f2\i meek
\f0\i0 , for God will give the world to them.\'92 (Matthew 5:5); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 qusevegnagh-	modest (be ~)												to be modest or humble				CK A & W 96		qusevegte-	qusevegte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
qusighneq	2ecb4ys2	crack (hairline ~)		qusighneghmikun peluusa pelleghtuq \'91the saucer fell apart at its hairline crack\'92													hairline crack		< qusak-ligh-neq\super 2				\nosupersub qusighneq	qusighneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
qusighqe-	2ecb52s-	cracks (develop or cause ~ especially when weight is applied)		qusighquq \'91it is getting cracked\'92; qusighqaa \'91he cracked it by putting weight on it\'92													to develop or cause cracks especially when weight is applied		< qusak-ligh-ghqe\super 3\nosupersub - (?)				qusighqe-	qusighqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
qusma	2ecv]f	grass (kind of ~ with tuberous root)		
\f2\i Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined	
\f0\i0 wild rhubarb (?) root												kind of grass with tubrous root; wild rhubarb (?) root				2nd glosss from Akynganga\'92s article in \'93Beringia\'94		qusma	qusma	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \

\f1\b quta\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 2enf\super s	\nosupersub land		angyami piiq yuuk "quta aliightuq" \'91the man in the boat said "land is in sight"\'92	landmass seen from sea	Chukotka								Siberia			land; landmass seen from the sea; Chukotka; Siberia		PE qut0				qutae	qutae	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \
quteghllak	2ens5k]zr	Chukotka		
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91the big (main)land\'92; Neqamikeghllagluku ayuqaat laalighqwaalleghteng Sivuqaghhmiit 
\f2\i Quteghllagmun
\f0\i0 .  Puygulleghqiitaat. \'91People remember well how it was when St. Lawrence Islanders  visited 
\f2\i Siberia
\f0\i0 . They definitely won\'92t forget it.\'92 (PANGEGH. 1)	Siberia												Chukotka; Siberia		< quta-ghllak				Quteghllak	Quteghllak	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
qutenge-	2ens3s-	reach the shore		iflakat angyat qutengluteng uughqaalluteng yuvghiightut naantuleyeng liinnaluku \'91the lost boat (crew) looked around to see where they were upon reaching land and disembarking\'92	shore (reach the ~)	find land after being lost at sea											to reach the shore; to find land after being lost at sea		< quta-nge-				qutenge-	qutenge-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 -\
qutepik	2ensgbr	mainland			land (dry safe ~ as opposed to rocks or marsh)	Chukotka								Siberia			mainland; dry safe land as opposed to rocks or marsh; Chukotka; Siberia		< qutepik-pik				qutepik	qutepik	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
qutngugh-	2en3]e4-	bending over forward with head down while in a sitting position		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0 qutngughtuq \'91he bent over forward\'92; qutnughngaaq \'91he is bent over forward\'92													bending over forward with head down while in a sitting position		PE qut&u3-				qutngugh-	qutngugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1271 -\
qutngughruk	2en3]e4her	back (upper part of ~)															upper part of ~		< qutngugh-?-				qutngughruk	qutngughruk	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
qutug-	2eneu-	snore		qutugtuq \'91he snored\'92 /													to snore		PY-S qutu!-				qutug-	qutug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 -\
qutuq	2ene2	collarbone															collarbone		PE qutu(!)				qutuq	qutuq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \
quugniigh-	28uy74-	firewood (look for ~)															to look for firewood		< quuk\super 2\nosupersub -niigh-				qugnigh-	qxgnxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
quugsaghtugh-	28[cz5ne4-	firewood (look for ~ on the shore by boat)															to look for firewood on the shore by boat		< quuk\super 2\nosupersub -te\super 2\nosupersub -yaghtugh-				qugsaghtugh-	qxgsaghtugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
quugsiigh-	28[c74-	firewood (gather ~)			get firewood								check vowel lengths; we have qugaghsiigh- \'91to chop wood\'92 (I have same question, It is also in V & E CK)				to get firewood	he,bnm. rjkjnm lhjdf	< quuk-siigh-		Rub. 287		qugsigh-	qxgsxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1093 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
quugsiiqaq	28[c72f2	log															log	gjktyj	< quugsiigh-(g)kaq		Rub. 287		qugsiqaq	qxgsxqaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1093 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
quugte-	28[ns-	get firewood			firewood (get ~)												to get firewood		< quuk\super 2\nosupersub -te\super 2\nosupersub -				qugte-	qxgte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b quuk\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 28r\'a1	swan (whistling ~)		quugem uyaqghwa taakestaaghhaaguq \'91the swan\'92s neck is long\'92; Satelgaq, 
\f2\i quuk
\f0\i0 , yungaghaqulluni kiigem qawaaga, pennam qawaaga katelghaatuq \'85. \'91The
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 crane
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 and the 
\f2\i swan
\f0\i0 , together with the  jaeger, the summer bird and the cliff bird, have all arrived, \'85.\'92   (SIKU. ESL. ESGHA. 106)	whistling swan	
\f2\i Olor columbianus											
\f0\i0 whistling swan
\f2\i  (Olor columbianus)		
\f0\i0 PE qu!9u!				quk1	qxk1	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1082 1\

\f1\b quuk\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 28r\'99	firewood		Uksumi 
\f2\i quugkaaluki
\f0\i0  nalighmeng mayughtiiqut unaghsimeng. \'91In the winter that\'92s their supply of 
\f2\i firewood
\f0\i0  piled up, also wood for making things.\'92 (MRS. DELL W. 8)	wood (firewood)												firewood; wood		PE q09u!				quk2	qxk2	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1082 2\
quullimaqe-	28k]7vf2-	look after someone\'92s health and wealth		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check; what exactly is the base?				to look after someone\'92s health and wealth	cktlbnm pf xmbv-kb,j pljhjdmtv b ,kfujgjkexbtv			Rub. 281		qullimaqe-	qxllimaqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 -\
quulngughun	28k3e4ey	tenth one		
\f2\i also 
\f0\i0 quulngughuta; 
\f2\i Quulngughutangani
\f0\i0  aghneghmi nutaan qaygeghllequten. \'91On the 
\f2\i tenth
\f0\i0  day you will reach the top.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 17)													tenth one		< qula-(ng)ughte-(u)n				qulngughun	qxlngughun	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
quulqin	28k]2by	loft in semi-subterranean house															loft in semi-subterranean house		PY qulqin (under PE qul0); < qula-?-(u)n				qulqin	qxlqin	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \
quulqite-	28k]2bns-	reach the top or the upper level		= qulqite-	top (reach the ~)	upper level (reach the ~)											to reach the top or the upper level		< qula-qite-				qulqite-	qxlqite-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
quultak	28k]nfr	pants (type of girl\'92s short decorated ~)		
\f2\i this is a dual													
\f0\i0 type of girl\'92s short decorated pants				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 103		qultak	qxltak	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \
quulvani	2ekdfyb	up high		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 high up												up high	yfdth[e. dscjrj	PE qulva3- (under PE qul0-); < qula-vaq-
\f2\i localis		
\f0\i0 CK V & E 116, CK		qulvani	qxlvani	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1074 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
quulvekesiiq	28kdsrsc72	pintail duck			
\f2\i Anas acuta	
\f0\i0 duck, pintail											pintail duck (Anas acuta)						qulvekesiq	qxlvekesxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1083 \u1074 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
quumsagte-	28vcz[ns-	tower pver															to tower over						qumsagte-	qxmsagte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
quumziigh-	28vp74-	gather kindling															to gather kindling						qumzigh-	qxmzxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1084 \u1079 \u1251 \u1271 -\
quumziiq	28vp72	kindling															kindling		< quuk\super 2\nosupersub -vleghaq				qumziq	qxmzxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1084 \u1079 \u1251 \u1179 \
quun	28y	you see		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle; see also enclitic 
\f0\i0 =qun	you know	see (you ~)											you see; you know		from Chukchi qun \'91well; so it is\'92				qun	qxn	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1085 \
quungvaq	283df2	east		quungvani \'91in the area further up\'92; quungvaghaa \'91the wind is shifting towards the east\'92; ggutanga quungvaqun ilefkaghaghsimaaq, iingqaan tungangakun \'91his tooth broke off up near the gum area\'92; angyam asiilleghqaa quungvaghaa \'91he cut the piece farther up off the part where an additional skin is to be sewn on the side of a skin boat\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qungevaq	east wind	up (area further ~ from shore or border)											east; east wind; area further up from shore or border		< qunga\super e\nosupersub -vaq				qungvaq	qxngvaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1187 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
quunpekaghtaq	28ygsrf5nf2	past (something from the distant ~)			forever (something that has existed ~)												something from the distant past or that has existed forever		< quunpeng -kaghtaq				qunpekaghtaq	qxnpekaghtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1085 \u1087 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
quunpeng	28ygs3	always		
\f2\i adverbial particle;
\f0\i0  awen quunpeng \'91almost always, usually\'92; quunpeng avelghaghpenani igaghyaghaquq \'91he always goes to school without missing any days\'92; quunpeng kiinghani Sivuqaghtaqunga \'91I always go to Gambell in the summer\'92; \'85 Quyillget taakut anglegutkullghiit yuget tallimat. Quyngimeggnun 
\f2\i quunpeng
\f0\i0  piiqelghiit elngaatall. \'91\'85 apparently five Chukchi siblings. They go to their reindeer 
\f2\i all the time
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. II:2); Uksumi uqfigam tangillghem qaamnangi amestaaghhaat, saghnaaqelghiit. Enkaam petugtaaghaqegkangit aagrani 
\f2\i quunpeng
\f0\i0  kineghngiita. \'91In wintertime, the part we eat of the willow that is thin is picked. So then, they are tied 
\f2\i at all times
\f0\i0  in the sleeping area of the house while being dried.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:236)	all (at ~ times)												always; at all times	dctulf	from Chukchi qonpe& \'91always, continuously\'92		CK V & E 125 (russ vocab)		qunpeng	qxnpeng	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1085 \u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \
quunperugllak	28ygshe[k]zr	forever		quunperugllak kenlengunaan kiyaghlleq \'91life everlasting\'92													forever		< quunpeng-ruk-ghllak				qunperugllak	qxnperugllak	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1085 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
quunqagh-	28y2f4-	wink		quunqaataa \'91he winked at her\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qunagh-, qunqalleg-	blink												to wink; to blink						qunqagh-	qxnqagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
quupaghneq	28gf4ys2	crack		quuk quupaghneghakun pelleghtaa \'91he split the piece of firewood along the crack\'92													crack		< quupaghte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub qupaghneq	qxpaghneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
quupaghte-	28gf5ns-	crack			split												to crack; to split		< quupe-aghte-				qupaghte-	qxpaghte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
quupe-	28gs-	split		quupuq \'91it split\'92; quupaa \'91he split it\'92 / qukaakun quupaa amiq \'91he split the skin down the middle\'92	cut in two lengthwise												to split; to cut in two lengthwise		< qupe-				qupe-	qxpe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1087 \u1099 -\
quupkagh-	38grf4-	shocked (be ~ )		Elngaatall 
\f2\i quupkaamalghii
\f0\i0  unkuseni esghaghyaqminiki kaviighhaghnguq taawa naapsimalghii. \'91To his 
\f2\i utter amazement
\f0\i0 , when he looked there was a fox caught in his trap.\'92 (SULUWET 60)	amazed (be ~)												to be shocked; to be amazed				VK		qupkagh-	qxpkagh-	\uc0\u1187 \u1263 \u1087 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
quupkaq	28grf2	bad surprise			tragic surprise	surprise, bad or tragic											bad or tragic surprise						qupkaq	qxpkaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1087 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
quupneq	28gys2	piece cut lengthwise from something			split thing												piece cut lengthwise from something; split thing	ghjljkmysq jnhtpjr xtuj-k>	< quupe-neq\super 2		\nosupersub Rub. 285		qupneq	qxpneq	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1087 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
quupun1	28gey\'a1	crack, large, in sea ice															large crack in sea ice		< quupe-(u)n				qupun1	qxpun1	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1087 \u1091 \u1085 1\
quupun2	28gey\'99	strip of fur (one of four) on a woman\'92s fur pants
\f2\i  (qaallnaak)															
\f0\i0 strip of fur (one of four) on a woman\'92s fur pants
\f2\i  (qaallnaak)				
\f0\i0 CK Rub 285		qupun2	qxpun2	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1087 \u1091 \u1085 2\
Quurkeli	@8irskb	raven (hero/trickster ~ especially in Chukotkan stories)		Naayghami Kiyaghtaaq 
\f2\i Quurkeli
\f0\i0  Meteghlluk \'91The raven 
\f2\i Quurkeli
\f0\i0  Who Lived at a Mountain\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 101)													hero/trickster raven (especially in Chukotkan stories)		from Chukchi Qu(u)rk0l \'91hero raven, the creator\'92				qurkeli	qxrkeli	\uc0\u1178 \u1263 \u1096 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \
quusqe-	28c2s-	pull up one's shoulders and pull down one's head		= quuste-	shrug one's shoulders	huddle up from cold											to pull up one's shoulders and pull down one's head; to shrug one's shoulders; to huddle up from cold				CK V & E 173; Rub 286; VK		qusqe-	qxsqe-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1089 \u1179 \u1099 -\
quuste-	28cns-	pull up one's shoulders and pull down one's head		= quusqe-	shrug one's shoulders	huddle up from cold											to pull up one's shoulders and pull down one's head; to shrug one's shoulders; to huddle up from cold				VK		quste-	qxste-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
quutak	28nfr	suspenders		
\f2\i this is a dual; the singular would be 
\f0\i0 quutaq													pair of suspenders						qutak	qxtak	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \
quutfaq	28naf2	north		
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 \'91Anuqa 
\f2\i quutfaghmeng
\f0\i0  ayuqeftuq.\'92 The wind is coming from the 
\f2\i north
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 146)													north		< quta-vaq				qutfaq	qxtfaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1092 \u1072 \u1179 \
Quutmii	@8nv]7	Chukotkan person (especially a Yupik)		Quutmiit \'91the (Yupik) people of Chukotka\'92 (as opposed to St. Lawrence Island); Quutmiistun \'91in the Yupik language as spoken by the Chukotkon Yupik people\'92; Allaghllak 
\f2\i Quutmiineng
\f0\i0  Ungazimeng allgeqaq, allgellgha entaqun ayuqelghii. \'91A foreigner, he stems from the 
\f2\i Chukotkans
\f0\i0 , from Chaplino, he arose from there, so it appears.\'92	Siberian (mainland) person												Chukotkan person (especially a Yupik); Siberian (mainland) person		< quta-mii				Qutmi	Qxtmx	\uc0\u1178 \u1263 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1251 \
quuve-	28ds-	decrease in size		quuvuq \'91it became small\'92 /													to decrease in size		PE quv0-				quve-	qxve-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1074 \u1099 -\
quuvyug-	28dm/u-	insignificant (feel ~)		quuvyugtuq \'91he feels insignificant\'92 /	feel insecure or insignificant												to feel insecure or insignificant		PE quv0-				quvyug-	qxvyug-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1074 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
quuyigh-	28qb4-	wind dies down		quuyighluni naqam anuqa kaataghaghaqluni ayuquq \'91the wind has died down, yet it gets windy frequently\'92; igleghtellghem tagtalngani quuyamun kaatut \'91while they were going, they suddenly got to a place where there was no wind\'92	wind (be without ~)												for the wind to die down; to be without wind				CK A & W 97 CK		quyigh-	qxyigh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1263 \u1253 \u1080 \u1271 -\
quveghta	2eds5nf	cataract in eye															cataract in eye		PE quv03t0				quveghta	quveghta	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
quvegsi	2eds[cb	
\f2\i Polygonum tripterocarpum			
\f0\i0 wild rhubarb-like plant that grows in Chukotka												wild rhubarb-like plant 
\f2\i (Polygonum tripterocarpum)
\f0\i0  that grows in Chukotka		PY quve!ci(q)				quvegsi	quvegsi	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \
Quvegsilek	@eds[cbksr	Koovukseluk Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91one with quvegsi 
\f2\i (Polygonum tripterocarpum)
\f0\i0  \'91, 
\f2\i a plant which is found in Chukotka only (according to botanists)													
\f0\i0 Koovukseluk Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		< quvegsi-lek				Quvegsilek	Quvegsilek	\uc0\u1178 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
quvluuki-	2edk8rb-	crumple up (garment or the like)		aatkani aghipaghllaget mataghqughluki taaggun quvluukiluki unisimakangi \'91she took off her wet clothes, crumpled them up, and just left them there\'92													to crumple up (garment or the like)				CK A & W 97, VK		quvluki-	quvlxki-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1083 \u1263 \u1082 \u1080 -\
Quwatak	@e1fnfr	Bunnell Cape on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Bunnell Cape on St. Lawrence Is.						Quwatak	Quwatak	\uc0\u1178 \u1091 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \
quya-	2ez-	happy (be ~)		quyaaq \'91he was happy\'92 /	joyous (be ~)												to be happy; to be joyous		PE quya-				quya-	quya-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1103 -\
quyake-	2ezrs-	happy (be ~ about)		quyakaa \'91he is happy about it or her\'92 /													to be happy about		 < quya-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				quyake-	quyake-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 -\
quyanagh-	2ezyf4-	happiness (cause ~)															to cause happiness		< quya-nagh-				quyanagh-	quyanagh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
quyanaghhalek	2ezyf5fksr	happy (what a ~ occurrence!)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 what a happy occurrence!		< quyanaq-ghhalek				quyanaghhalek	quyanaghhalek	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
quyanaq	2ezyf2	cause of happiness															cause of happiness		< quya-naq				quyanaq	quyanaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
quyanatun	2ezyfney	happily		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 fortunately	causing joy											happily; fortunately; causing joy		< quyanagh-equalis				quyanatun	quyanatun	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
quyiite-	2eq7ns-	self-assured, self-confident (be ~)			unafraid (be ~)												to be self-assured, self-confident, unafraid		< quyugh-(ng)ite-				quyite-	quyxte-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Quyillegqaatfik	@eqbk]s[26nabr	time in the fall when Eskimos go to the Chukchi to trade		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 August (late ~)	September (early ~)											time in the fall when Eskimos go to the Chukchi to trade; around late August or early September				CK Rub 277		Quyillegqatfik	Quyillegqxtfik	\uc0\u1178 \u1091 \u1253 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1179 \u257 \u1090 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \
quyillegtaq	2eqbk]s[nf2	skin boot, sealskin, knee-high, men\'92s															knee-high men\'92s sealskin boot		< Quyillek-taq\super 2				\nosupersub quyillegtaq	quyillegtaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
quyillegti-	2eqbk]s[nb-	speak Chukchi		quyillegtikayuguziin? \'91can you speak Chukchi?\'92; saghyat quyillegtiluki akagumi \'91he packed the equipment in the Chukchi way on his back\'92	Chukchi (speak ~)	pack things on the back in a certain (Chukchi style) way											to speak Chukchi; to pack things on the back in a certain (Chukchi style) way		< Quyillek-ti-				quyillegti-	quyillegti-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 -\
Quyillek	@eqbk]sr	Chukchi		Quyillget \'91Chukchis\'92	reindeer-owning (wealthy) Chukchi												Chukchi; reindeer-owning (wealthy) Chukchi	...xerxf-jktytdjl\\ ,jufnsq xerxf			...CK V & E 76 (russ voc, added wealthy...)		Quyillek	Quyillek	\uc0\u1178 \u1091 \u1253 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \
quyillgaaghti-	2eqbk][65nb-	Chukchi (speak ~)		quyillgaaghtiiq \'91he\'92s speaking Chukchi\'92	speak Chukchi												to speak Chukchi		< Quyillgaaq-ti-		VK\'92s notes		quyillgaghti-	quyillgxghti-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1080 -\
Quyillgaaq	@eqbk][62	Chukchi (non-reindeer owning, generally poor)		Quyillgaaghtiiq \'91he\'92s speaking Chukchi\'92; Sighinek aangepiglleghii nunaaghat esnaghmiit. Iwernga nunaaghmi kiyaghtaqut Yupigetlu, 
\f2\i Quyngillgaatlu
\f0\i0 . \'91Sireniki is a very large settlement of coast dwelling people. However, in the settlement both Yupiks and 
\f2\i Chukchis 
\f0\i0 live.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 152)	non-reindeer owning Chukchi												non reindeer-owning (generally poor) Chukchi	...,thtujdjq xerxf\\ ,tlysq. yt,jufnsq xerxf	< Quyillek-?-				Quyillgaq	Quyillgxq	\uc0\u1178 \u1091 \u1253 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u257 \u1179 \
quyngighniigh-	2eq3b4y74-	herd reindeer															to herd reindeer		< quyngiq-niigh-				quyngighnigh-	quyngighnxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
quyngighniighta	2eq3b4y75nf	reindeer herder															reindeer herder		< quyngighniigh-(s)ta				quyngighnighta	quyngighnxghta	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
quyngighqwaagh-	2eq3b52164-	herd reindeer															to herd reindeer		< quyngiq-?-				quyngighqwagh-	quyngighqwxgh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
quyngighqwaaghta	2eq3b52165nf	reindeer herder															reindeer herder		< quyngighqwaagh-(s)ta				quyngighqwaghta	quyngighqwxghta	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
quyngighqwaaq	2eq3b52162	reindeer herder		Quyngighqwaaghet \'91Savoonga people\'92 (so called, formerly, since Savoonga was founded as a reindeer herding settlement)	Savoona resident												reindeer herder; Savoonga resident		< quyngiq-?-				quyngighqwaq	quyngighqwxq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
quyngilegti-	2eq3bk]s[nb-	travel by reindeer-pulled sled		Quunpeng 
\f2\i quyngilegtimeng
\f0\i0  ayuqsalghiikut, qimugsighpenaamta. \'91We always traveled with 
\f2\i reindeer-teams
\f0\i0 , never dogteams.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:76)													to travel by reindeer-pulled sled		< quyngiq-?-				quyngilegti-	quyngilegti-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 -\
Quyngim Qalghighviga	
\fs20 @eq3bv @fk4b4dbuf	
\fs24 September		
\f2\i Chukotkan; literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time when the reindeer issues its cry\'92; 
\f2\i also listed in various sources as
\f0\i0  August-September, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  October													September				see Krauss\'92s list		Quyngim Qalghighviga	Quyngim Qalghighviga	\uc0\u1178 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1080 \u1084  \u1178 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \
quyngiq	2eq3b2	reindeer		Iimnanguq. Quyillgennguq 
\f2\i quyngightupiglleghiit
\f0\i0  ama mengteghaghtuqat. \'91It happened once, they say. There were, it is said, Chukchis who had lots of 
\f2\i reindeer
\f0\i0  and houses.\'92 (MATERIALY 234); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  qerenga													reindeer		from Chukchi qora&0 \'91reindeer\'92 (if not from the closer form, Koryak qoya&a \'91reindeer\'92)	04, 14		quyngighqwaagh-, quyngilegti-, quyngivak	quyngiq	quyngiq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
quyngivak	2eq3bdfr	moose		
\f2\i Chukotkan	Alces alces												
\f0\i0 moose (Alces alces)		< quyngiq-vak				quyngivak	quyngivak	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
quyugh-	2e/4-	intimidated (feel ~)		quyughtuq \'91he felt intimidated\'92 / quyughtaa \'91he intimidated him\'92	cower	overwhelmed (feel ~ by a more powerful person)											to feel intimidated; to cower; to feel overwhelmed by a more powerful person						quyugh-	quyugh-	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1102 \u1271 -\
quyughnaq	2e/4yf2	intimidating person															intimidating person		< quyugh-naq				quyughnaq	quyughnaq	\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1102 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
Quyutaq	@e/nf2	Krasivaya Mt. Krasivaya Mt. between Imtuk and Angetequq in Chukotka (site near ~)		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site near Krasivaya Mt. between Imtuk and Angetequq in Chukotka				CK		Quyutaq	Quyutaq	\uc0\u1178 \u1091 \u1102 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
raarwik	h6h1br	underpants		
\f2\i this is a dual													
\f0\i0 underpants		from Chukchi ?	x			rarwik	rxrwik	\uc0\u1088 \u257 \u1088 \u1265 \u1080 \u1082 \
ragigu-	hfubue-	set up camp while traveling		qamilgut alla ragiwaaquneng qamiyeteng pinighsaghlleqiit \'91the travelers will fix their sleds next time they set up camp\'92													to set up camp while traveling		from Chukchi rewiw- \'91set up camp (nomads), take up residence\'92		CK Rub 435; Akingqwaaghneghet 110	Rub. gives ragiwiiquq and ragigulleq; Akin. has ragiwagh- (for ragiwaagh-, I assume, which would be ragigu- plus a postbase -agh-)	ragigu-	ragigu-	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 -\
rakanga	hfrf3f	reindeer herders, nomadic, which only a shaman can see											known to Beda Slwooko, and heard about by Rosa Irigoo; from Chukchi ra-\'92together\'92, qaanga-\'92reindeer\'92; Tanko had rekenga \'91on the sleigh deer\'92				nomadic reindeer herders which only a shaman can see them		from Chukchi ra- \'91together\'92 and qaa&a \'91reindeer\'92		CK Rub 435		rakanga	rakanga	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \
ramkae	hfvrfs	clan		ramka qafsina Sivuqameta? \'91how many clans are there on St. Lawrence Is.?\'92; ramket uglaghtut Sivuqamelnguut \'91there are many clans on St. Lawrence Is.\'92; 
\f2\i also plural,
\f0\i0  ramket
\f2\i , even for one clan;
\f0\i0  ramket taakut pikaat \'91he belongs to that clan\'92; 
\f2\i Ramkem
\f0\i0  aaptaqaa ellnga, \'93Nateta elpek naan?\'94 \'91
\f2\i People
\f0\i0  were asking her, \'93Where is your mother?\'94\'92 (YUP. ULUNG. 2:86); Nunam 
\f2\i ramkengi
\f0\i0  pillugutullequt, \'85. \'91The 
\f2\i peoples
\f0\i0  of the world will fight each other (nation will rise up against nation), \'85.\'92 (Mark 13.8); 
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  laluramka \'91white person\'92	ethnic group	people								family			clan; ethnic group; people; family		from Chukchi remk0n \'91people, crowd\'92	14			ramkae	ramkae	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1099 \
ranmae	hfyvfs	wall (inside ~ of the traditional dome-shaped house)											check				inside wall of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		from Chukchi renm0n \'91wall\'92	14	deR. 355		ranmae	ranmae	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1085 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
ranmegu	hfyvsue	ground floor of the traditional dome-shaped house			floor (ground ~ of the traditional dome-shaped house)								check exact meaning				ground floor of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		from Chukchi renm0n \'91wall\'92 (?)	14	deR. 355		ranmegu	ranmegu	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1085 \u1084 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \
ranmiwitalghii	hfyvb1bnfk47	greedy person			begs (one who ~ for things without need)												one who is greedy; one who begs for things without need	;flysq	from Chukchi ? with Yupik postbases -tagh- and -lghii	x	CK Rub 435		ranmiwitalghi	ranmiwitalghi	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1085 \u1084 \u1080 \u1265 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
rapa	hfgf	rubber		= rava	rubber band												rubber; rubber band		from English \'91rubber\'92	SLI			rapa	rapa	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \

\f1\b ratama\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub hfnfvf\super s	\nosupersub roof, canvas, winter		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 winter canvas roof		from Chukchi retem, pl. retem0t \'91covering of yaranga\'92				ratamae	ratamae	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
ratamiiraq	hfnfv7hf2	parka or overalls of reindeer skin		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  ratamiirak,
\f2\i  for one such garment													
\f0\i0 parka or overalls of reindeer skin		from Chukchi retemir\'920n \'91summer parka of reindeer skin\'92	14			ratamiraq	ratamxraq	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1251 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
ratamyaag-	hfnfvm9u-	put on waterproof summer boots		ratamyaagluni aga igleghtuq\'92 he put his summer waterproof boots on and went out\'92													to put on waterproof summer boots						ratamyag-	ratamyxg-	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 -\
ratamyaak	hfnfvm9r	boot, knee-high and waterproof of sealskin with hair, for summer															knee-high summer boot of waterproof sealskin with hair in		from Chukchi retemye!0t \'91kind of boot\'92	14			ratamyak	ratamyxk	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
ratanngaawen	hfnfy361sy	perhaps		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  ratanngaawen ellmaaragtekan aghvengellequt \'91probably they will catch a whale when the weather improves\'92	maybe												probably; likely		from Chukchi ratan&aw&en \'91enough; sufficient\'92		CK A & W 99; Rub 436		ratanngawen	ratanngxwen	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1187 \u257 \u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \
rava	hfdf	rubber		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E); 
\f0\i0 Tawani-llu 1783 uksumi, France-mi liisimalghii(m) Sarl(em) ulimamaa alla ghhuuqaq, suul\'92kemeng qiipaghaghmeng, ilakelghii 
\f2\i ravameng
\f0\i0 . \'91Then in the winter of 1783 in France the learned man Sarl made another balloon out of silk fabrik, partly 
\f2\i rubber
\f0\i0 .\'92 (NATEN YUUK 6); = rapa													rubber		from English \'91rubber\'92	Chuk.	CK V & E 84; Rub 435		rava	rava	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \
rawelingae	hf1skb3fs	squirrel		
\f2\i Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined; apparently this is a different type of squirrel than
\f0\i0  sikik, 
\f2\i perhaps,
\f0\i0  \'91tree squirrel\'92													squirrel		from Chukchi raw0l\'92e&, pl. raw0l\'92e&0t \'91squirrel\'92	04, 14			rawelingae	rawelingae	\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1265 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
reghange-	hs4f3s-	start to get dark earlier		reghangeqestaqan iqalluk igleghllequq \'91when it starts to get dark earlier, the fish will start heading out\'92; reghangneghsighaqaat nunaaghmeggnun pinaluteng \'91they are waiting for it to start to get dark earlear so they can go to their camp\'92													for it to start to get dark earlier				CK A & W 99		reghange-	reghange-	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 -\
reghete-	hs4sns-	peek in or out		reghetuq \'91he is peeking\'92; reghetaa \'91he is peeking at him\'92 / 	look through a small hole or crack or from behind something												to peek in or out; to look through a small hole or crack or from behind something						reghete-	reghete-	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
reghigh-	hs4b4-	open partially		reghightuq \'91it opened a crack\'92 / reghighaa \'91he opened it a crack\'92	pry up or open partially	wake up											to open partially; to pry up or open partially; to wake up						reghigh-	reghigh-	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
reghighqe-	hs4b52s-	open wide			break down (wall or the like) to make an opening												to open wide; to break down (wall or the like) to make an opening		< reghigh-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -		VK		reghighqe-	reghighqe-	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
reghilleq	hs4bk]s2	hole (accidentally made)		reghilleghqun \'91through a hole\'92													hole (accidentally made)		< reghigh-lleq				reghilleq	reghilleq	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
reghireghiiq	hs4bhs472	holes (one that has lots of ~)		qenungiitam asingi reghireghiightuqat \'91a brash ice scoop\'92s bottom has a lot of holes\'92													thing that has lots of holes				CK A & W 99		reghireghiq	reghireghxq	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1179 \
regla-/regle-	hsukz- hsuks-	curious (be ~)		
\f2\i base of form used where suffix begins with a consonant, rather than a vowel, is
\f0\i0  regre-; Neghsat 
\f2\i reglengut
\f0\i0 , iwernga riistunghuut. 
\f2\i Regleliqaqut
\f0\i0  neghsat wetku yakughniinneghani. \'91Seals become 
\f2\i curious
\f0\i0 , but they are sly. Seals do get 
\f2\i curious
\f0\i0  but only when they aren\'92t in danger.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 68); = legra-, regra-	inquisitive (be ~)	nosy (be ~)											to be nosy; to be curious; to be inquisitive						regle-	regle-	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 - \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 -\
regra- / regre-	hsuhf- hsghs-	nosy (be ~)		regraaq \'91he was being nosy, was snooping\'92 / 
\f2\i base of form used where suffix begins with a consonant, rather than a vowel, is
\f0\i0  regre-: regretkaa \'91he was nosy about it, snooped into it\'92; regrefqaavek \'91don't be nosy!\'92; = legla-, regla-	curious (be ~)	inquisitive (be ~)											to be nosy; to be curious; to be inquisitive				Rub. 437		regra-	regra-	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 - \u1088 \u1099 \u1087 \u1088 \u1099 -\
rekelta	hsrsk]nf	strap, long, which is used to tighten roof of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 long strap which is used to tighten roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 435		rekelta	rekelta	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \
repa	hsgf	hammer															hammer		from Chukchi r0pe&0, pl. r0pet \'91hammer\'92	14		reqangwaaq, repaqu-	repa	repa	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \
repa-	hsgf-	hit with a hammer		repaa \'91he hit it with a hammer, he hammered at it\'92 /													to hit with a hammer; to hammer						repa-	repa-	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 -\
repall	hsgfk]	strong (as a result of ~ force)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  anuqlighllagluni repall saghyat tengqaataqii \'91because it was very windy the things got blown away\'92; eslallughughteghllagluni repall naayvaq uleveghllagtuq \'91when it rained so hard it caused the lake to overflow\'92; qesightem angtalanganeng repall aatkii aghighllagtut \'91he was sweating so much that his clothes were soaking wet\'92; Yugem piniqeghllagem angtalanganeng kelengakeghllak aghulaqnayukan. Aanulluku 
\f2\i repall
\f0\i0  manughamun quyngiighsan napaqaghrugllagkun petgluku esqakmantestaqegkanga. \'91The man loved him so much that he kept watch over him in case he went away. He 
\f2\i even
\f0\i0  brought him outside in the yard and tied him with the reindeer lasso on a pole and watched him.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. II:13); Amsaanaanghani seghleghwaaghuut taawa. Puyuq aanegpenani mingiteghllaneghmini 
\f2\i repall
\f0\i0  aneghsiilliqnaghlluni ayuquq. \'91When it is calm, it is terrible. The soot doesn\'92t go out, and when it is scattered all around (the house) 
\f2\i consequently
\f0\i0  it is like the place is full of cinders.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:83); Kaamgek naatghighquullutek, 
\f2\i repall
\f0\i0  ununghagu itegii kumlaqughaqegkangi. \'91His boot soles were worn out, 
\f2\i so much so
\f0\i0  that at night his feet would be cold.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 44)	consequently	so much so that											as a result of strong force; consequently; so much so that		from Chukchi r0pet \'91even\'92				repall	repall	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \
repangwaaq	hsgf3162	hammer (standard carpenter\'92s ~)															standard carpenter's hammer		< repa-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				repangwaq	repangwxq	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
repaqu-	hsgf2e-	hammer repeatedly															to hammer repeatedly		< repa-qu-				repaqu-	repaqu-	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
reqiiwmete-	hs271vsns-	bent (be ~)		iighwilnguq quupaghlluni reqiiwmellghani uqlightaqeftuq \'91he was watching out for seal at the bend where a piece of the sea ice had broken away\'92; ivenruutem salngagkek reqiiwmelnguuk pegnem nallghusaamakek \'91he had a hard time fixing and straightening the distorted motor well in the boat\'92	distorted (be ~)												to be bent; to be distorted		from Chukchi ?, with Yupik postbase -mete\super 1\nosupersub -	x	CK A & W 99		reqiwmete-	reqxwmete-	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1179 \u1251 \u1265 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b resinugata\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub hscbyeufnf\super s	\nosupersub buckle of belt		= risinugata\super e													\nosupersub buckle of belt	ghz;rf	from Chukchi ricitine& \'91belt buckle (?)\'92		CK Rub 438		resinugatae	resinugatae	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \
retwha-	hsn1f-	bombard with artillery		retwhaaq \'91he bombarded something\'92; retwhaa \'91he bombarded it\'92 /													to bombard with artillery		from Chukchi r0twat0k \'91shower, bespatter with\'92, r0twat0r \'91gun, cannon\'92	14		retwhan, retwhaqu-	retwha-	retwha-	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1090 \u1265 \u1072 -\
retwhan	hsn1fy	cannon			gun, big	artillery piece											cannon; big gun; artillery piece		< retwha-(u)n, or from Chukchi r0twat0r \'91gun, cannon\'92 directly				retwhan	retwhan	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1090 \u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \
retwhaqu-	hsn1f2e-	bombard repeatedly															to repeatedly bombard		< retwha-qu-				retwhaqu-	retwhaqu-	\uc0\u1088 \u1099 \u1090 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
riiggni-	h7[y]b-	make a den (of an animal)		riiggniiq \'91it made a den\'92; riignii \'91it made a den in it\'92 / saghligaq aqsalek riiggniluni ighnimalghii \'91the female dog made a den and gave birth\'92; siqlugaq sikigem riiggnimaa \'91a squirrel made a den in the underground meat cache\'92													to make a den (of an animal)		< riigta-?-		CK A & W 99		riggni-	rxggni-	\uc0\u1088 \u1251 \u1093 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 -\
riighnak	h74yfr	seashore life type, edible		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; cf.
\f0\i0  riiq													edible seashore life type						righnak	rxghnak	\uc0\u1088 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
riiglluk	h7[k]/r	artemeia			wormwood	
\f2\i Artemesia sp.											
\f0\i0 artemesia or wormwood 
\f2\i (Artemesia sp.)		
\f0\i0 PE ca90!(i3)				riglluk	rxglluk	\uc0\u1088 \u1251 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
riigsi-	h7[cb-	make a den (of an animal)		kaviiq riigsimaaq naayvam akingakun \'91a fox made a den on the south side of the lake\'92	den (make a ~ (of an animal)												to make a den (of an animal)		< riigta-i\super 2\nosupersub -		VK\'92s notes		rigsi-	rxgsi-	\uc0\u1088 \u1251 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 -\
riigta	h7[nf	den		Esghaamakagna sikik 
\f2\i riigtemineng
\f0\i0  aanluni navek pangalelghii.  Nalughqaghsimalghii 
\f2\i riigtengan
\f0\i0  manungakun. \'91He saw squirrel running out from her 
\f2\i den
\f0\i0 . He landed in front of her 
\f2\i den
\f0\i0 .\'92 (KALLAG. 89)	lair												den; lair		maybe from Aleut cixti-X \'91fox\'92s den\'92, and/or ixti-X \'91pit, grave\'92, with the initial r from Chukchi r0! \'91dig\'92 (see $i!t0 in Fortescue et al. 
\f4 1994)
\f0  				rigta	rxgta	\uc0\u1088 \u1251 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \
riiq	h72	earwax		riighightuq \'91he removed his earwax\'92; riightuuq \'91he has lots of earwax\'92													earwax		PE t0k90(3)				riq	rxq	\uc0\u1088 \u1251 \u1179 \
riirngi-	h7h3b-	watch stealthily		riirngiiq \'91he's stealthily watching\'92; riirngii \'91he's stealthily watching her\'92 / riirngilleqaa \'91he will spy on her\'92; riirngivalluq \'91one who spies on people\'92; riirngista \'91a spy\'92	observe	spy on											to watch stealthily; to observe; to spy on		from Chukchi r\'92eri&0k \'91question; inspect, investigate\'92	14			rirngi-	rxrngi-	\uc0\u1088 \u1251 \u1088 \u1187 \u1080 -\
riirvak	hbhdfr	grown (one who has ~, started to reason and learned a lot)		nalluneqsugluni aleni enankin riirvak ellmineng igleghutisqumakanga \'91he wasn\'92t sure, but he let his partner who was a mature person go on his own\'92	mature person												one who has grown, started to reason and learned a lot; mature person				CK A & W 100		rirvak	rxrvak	\uc0\u1088 \u1080 \u1088 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
riistu-	h7cne-	sly (be ~)		riistuuq \'91he/it is sly\'92, \'91he is stingy\'92 / 	stingy (be ~)												to be sly; to be stingy						ristu-	rxstu-	\uc0\u1088 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 -\
riistuneq	h7cneys2	parsimonious person		Riistuneq Kaviiq \'91The Sly Fox\'92 (AANGHHAQ 34)	stingy person	sly person or animal											parsimonious person; stingy person; sly person or animal		< riistu-neq\super 2				\nosupersub ristuneq	rxstuneq	\uc0\u1088 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
riistuniqe-	h7cneyb2s-	frugal		riistuniquq \'91he doesn't care to part with what he has feeling he may run out\'92 / riistuniqutkaa \'91he is parsimonious with it\'92; Ii naqam 
\f2\i riistuniqumaghma
\f0\i0  aghyuughnayukangatnga. \'91I did this [hid] in as much as I, 
\f2\i being very sneaky 
\f0\i0 , thought that might scold me.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)	stingy (be ~)	parsimonious (be overly ~)								sly or sneaky (be very ~)			to be frugal; to be overly parsimonious; to be stingy; to be very sly or sneaky		< riistuneq-iqe-				ristu-, ristuniqe-	rxstu-, rxstuniqe-	\uc0\u1088 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
rinimiwi-	hbybvb1b-	hoarder (be a ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  rinmiwi-									Check the 2nd  gloss in V&E book				to be a hoarder	crjgbljvybxfnm	from Chukchi ?	x	CK V & E 172		rinimiwi-	rinimiwi-	\uc0\u1088 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 \u1265 \u1080 -\
rinmiwi-	hbyvb1b-	beg		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  aghnalqwaaq rinmiwiiquq pilgughngaaghmi neqmeng ilangitnun tungsighniighaquq \'91the old lady is begging for food from others even though she has some\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  rinimiwi-													to beg	gjghjifqybxfnm	from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 436		rinmiwi-	rinmiwi-	\uc0\u1088 \u1080 \u1085 \u1084 \u1080 \u1265 \u1080 -\
ripalquulgek	hbgfk]28kusr	sled (Chukchi cargo ~ pulled by reindeer)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); this is a dual													
\f0\i0 Chukchi cargo sled pulled by reindeer		from Chukchi ripalqul!en \'91?\'92		CK Rub 436		ripalqulgek	ripalqxlgek	\uc0\u1088 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1263 \u1083 \u1075 \u1099 \u1082 \
risinugatae	hbcbyeufnfs	buckle of belt		= resinugata\super e									\nosupersub check this				buckle of belt		from Chukchi ricitine& \'91belt buckle (?)\'92	14	deR. 356		risinugatae	risinugatae	\uc0\u1088 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \
risqetkuq	hbc2snre2	boot (woman\'92s knee-high ~ made from suede)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 woman\'92s knee-high boot made from suede		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 436		risqetkuq	risqetkuq	\uc0\u1088 \u1080 \u1089 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \
rugell	heusk]	possibly		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  aamna nuugllaguniiqaat rugell unangsaallequt \'91they say that there are lots of seals in the ocean on the other side of the mountains, and so they would possibly catch a lot there\'92; rugell kaaskuni atuqiinaghnakek \'91he could possibly be able to use it when he arrives\'92													possibly		from Chukchi ?	x	CK A & W 100		rugell	rugell	\uc0\u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \
Rultangiq	Hek]nf3b2	Orion (constellation)											check this				Orion (constellation)		from Chukchi rult0ntet0k \'91to become crooked\'92 -- the belt of Orion is considered the crooked back of the archer Rulte\'92nnin	14	deR. 356		Rultangiq	Rultangiq	\uc0\u1056 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
Rutwhan	Gen[1fy	Tkachen Bay in Chukotka (site near mouth of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site near mouth of Tkachen Bay in Chukotka				CK		Rutwhan	Rutwhan	\uc0\u1055 \u1091 \u1090 \u1093 \u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \
ruughangi-	h84f3b-	hesitate (not ~ to do or say something)		sariighmun ilataqelghii ruughangitutmineng \'91he joins into activities due to his never being hesitant to do things\'92	outspoken (be ~)												to not hesitate to do or say something; to be outspoken 						rughangi-	rxghangi-	\uc0\u1088 \u1263 \u1271 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 -\
Ruuseghmii	H8cs4v7	Russian		
\f2\i sometimes also used for ChukotkanYupik person as opposed to St. Lawrence Is. Yupik person
\f0\i0 ; Ruuseghmiistun \'91in the Russian language\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91following Russian ways\'92													Russian		from English \'91Russia\'92 and/or Russian Hjccbz (Rosia) with Yupik suffix -miu \'91resident of\'92	SLI			Ruseghmi	Rxseghmx	\uc0\u1056 \u1263 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 \
Ruuseghmiik	H8cs4v7r	river that flows into Tomname Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 river that flows into Tomname Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.						Ruseghmik	Rxseghmxk	\uc0\u1056 \u1263 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 \u1082 \
ruwelam	he1skzv	best (for the ~)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 puwelam mughutegpenang, luuraq iikulleqaaten \'91for the best, don\'92t go hunting, the ice might break off (while you\'92re out there)\'92													for the best		from Chukchi ?	x			ruwelam	ruwelam	\uc0\u1088 \u1091 \u1265 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1084 \
sa	cz	what		sameng piyugsin? \'91what do you want?\'92; sanguzin? \'91what are you?\'92; sa tamaghhaan \'91everything\'92; savut \'91our relative\'92, \'91our thing(s)\'92; 
\f2\i relative case is
\f0\i0  saam (
\f2\i rather than
\f0\i0  *sam); 
\f2\i the expanded base
\f0\i0  sangaa- (
\f2\i underlyingly 
\f0\i0 sangau-) 
\f2\i rather than
\f0\i0  sangu- 
\f2\i is used for asking what something (3rd person) is; thus:
\f0\i0  sangaawa? \'91what is it?\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sangwaa	something	relative (kin)											what?; something; relative (kin)		PE cu(na)			; > sakelghaaq, sakenge-, sakwaaq, salghutaq, sangiighhaq, sangwaa, sanqun	sa	sa	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \
sa-	cz-	what (do ~?)		saa? \'91what did he do?\'92; aatkaghten saat aghvingisafki \'91what happened to your clothes when you didn\'92t wash them?; ayveq saa guusavgu? \'91what did the walrus do when you shot it?\'92; saaqat? \'91what\'92s going on?, what are they doing?\'92	something (do ~)												to do what?; to do something		PE cu(na)				sa-	sa-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 -\
saa	c9	I don\'92t know		
\f2\i particle; this exclamation is often pronounced with vowel as in English
\f0\i0  "hat"; = saami	doesn\'92t register in my mind	never mind											I don't know; it doesn't register in my mind; never mind						sa	sx	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \
saafqughwaagh-	c9a2e4164-	run one\'92s hand or fingers over (it)		aghnalqwaaghhaam ayaakam eltughani saafqughwaaghaa angtalanga esghaghnaluku \'91the little old blind lady ran her hands over her grandchild to determine how tall he was\'92	feel around												to run one\'92s or fingers hand over (it); to feel around		< saafte-qugh-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-		VK		safqughwagh-	sxfqughwxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1092 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
saafte-	c9ans-	touch		saaftuq \'91he touched something or touched himself\'92; saaftaa \'91he touched it\'92 /	feel												to touch; to feel		< safte-				safte-	sxfte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saag-	c9u-	scattered (get ~)		saagtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  saagaa \'91it is in disarray\'92 / saagtaa \'91he spread it out, uncoiled it, scattered it\'92; saagngaaq \'91it is spread out\'92	disarray (get into ~)	spread out (get ~)								uncoil			to get scattered; to get into disarray; to get spread out; to uncoil		PE ci9a!-			; > saagragh, saagruwaaq, saagta	sag-	sxg-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 -\
saagaghte-	c9uf5ns-	unroll suddenly		saagaghtuq \'91it suddenly unrolled\'92													to suddenly unroll or otherwise spread out		< saagte-aghte-		VK\'92s notes		sagaghte-	sxgaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saaghaghte-	c94f5ns-	suddenly happen		
\f2\i usually an event than causes concern	
\f0\i0 happen suddenly												to suddenly happen		< sa-?-aghte-		VK		saghaghte-	sxghaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saaghw-	c914-			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  saaqw													area or space right next to something						saghw-	sxghw-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1271 -\
saagmete-	c6uvsns-	level (be ~)			smooth (be ~)	flat (be ~)											to be level, smooth, flat	hjdysq. ukflrnq\\ lgkjcrbq					sagmete-	sxgmete-	\uc0\u1089 \u257 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saagraasiq	c9uh6cb2	iron for pressing clothes		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  saagraasik, 
\f2\i for one iron													
\f0\i0 iron for pressing clothes		< saag-ragh-(u)siq		VK		sagrasiq	sxgrxsiq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
saagragh-	c9uhf4-	uncoil			smooth out	spread out											to uncoil; to smooth out; to spread out		< saag-ragh-				sagragh-	sxgragh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
saagrugaaq	c9uheu62	solid ice surface, not so smooth, but good for traveling		
\f2\i see item 60 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	ice surface, solid, not so smooth, but good for traveling												solid ice surface, not so smooth, but good for traveling		< saag-?-				sagrugaq	sxgrugxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 \
saagsaate-	c6[c6ns-	break its harness (of a dog)		maghyaghqughteka saagsaalluni aghulaquq, sivulimnun malighqaatuq \'91my lead dog broke its harness and went on up to the team ahead of me\'92													to break its harness (of a dog)				CK A & W 101		sagsate-	sxgsxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u257 \u1093 \u1089 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saagsiqu	c9[cb2e	slush ice seen just below the surface of the water looking like streaks of oil in the water		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  saag-
\f2\i ; see item 61 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	greasy ice	sea ice type							; saagsightugh- in Rub 478				slush ice seen just below the surface of the water looking like streaks of oil in the water; greasy ice						sagsiqu	sxgsiqu	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \
saagta	c9[nf	gangline and harness of dogteam															gangline and harness of dogteam		< saag-(s)ta				sagta	sxgta	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \
saagvineq	c9udbys2	plain (flat land)		
\f2\i Chukotka (R)	
\f0\i0 valley, broad and flat												plain; broad flat valley	ljkbyf. hfdybyf	< saag-?		CK Rub 470		sagvineq	sxgvineq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
saalghaghta	c9k4f5nf	storm, unexpected, coming from any direction															unexpected storm coming from any direction				SLI cur. man. 20		salghaghta	sxlghaghta	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
saallgaghte-	c6k][f5ns-	scrape off accidently 		uguqelleni saallgaghsimaa \'91he scraped off the scab on his burn wound\'92; ighneghwaani saallgaghtaa kangsumqaghlluku \'91he scraped off the skin on his finger when it got stuck between two things\'92													to scrape off accidently 				CK A & W 101; Rub 473		sallgaghte-	sxllgaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saallghaghte-	c9k]5f5ns-	wind suddenly changes course and gets strong		angyat saallghaghutevziimakangi sikumelluki \'91the boat was almost caught by a sudden storm while it was in the ice\'92; quutfaghmeng saallghaghtaa \'91it suddenly started to blow hard and get stormy from the north\'92	storm arises												for wind to change course suddenly get strong; for a storm to arise						sallghaghte-	sxllghaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saalpak	c9k]gfr	jaw of whale, lower		
\f2\i dual, 
\f0\i0 saalpagek, 
\f2\i used for one jaw; cf. 
\f0\i0 sallgaq													lower jaw of whale				CK Rub 473 CK 		salpak	sxlpak	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
saalqaaq	c9k]262	thin new ice forming on surface of water		
\f2\i see item 62 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												thin new ice forming on surface of water						salqaq	sxlqxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u257 \u1179 \
saam	c9v	what?		
\f2\i relative case (rather than
\f0\i0  *sam); 
\f2\i cf. similar lengthening of vowel in
\f0\i0  yuuk \'91person\'92 (
\f2\i from base
\f0\i0  yug-), 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  whaa \'91right here\'92 (
\f2\i from base
\f0\i0  wha-); 
\f2\i Saam
\f0\i0  ukavek a-a-a, kaatestaten? \'91
\f2\i What
\f0\i0 , eh, made you come this way?\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. II:16); \'85 amalleqa agavek nunivagmun kiyang piyugmeng piiqut metghaam 
\f2\i saam
\f0\i0  maniganun ilangi. \'91\'85 and others would walk to the tundra for the eggs of eiders and 
\f2\i some
\f0\i0  (other birds). (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:140)	something												what?; something		< sa-
\f2\i relative				
\f0\i0 sam	sxm	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1084 \
saama	c9vf	also		
\f2\i particle; joins clauses only, not nouns or noun phrases;
\f0\i0  pinaqenghitut agavek saama anuqliqanga they aren't going out over there and furthermore the wind is picking up; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ama\super 1	\nosupersub too	furthermore								moreover			also; too; furthermore; moreover		from Chukchi sama \'91also; and\'92				sama	sxma	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1084 \u1072 \
saami	c9v7	I don\'92t know		
\f2\i particle; often pronounced with a rising and then falling intonation and with the initial syllable prolonged;
\f0\i0  = saa	doesn\'92t register in my mind												I don't know; it doesn't register in my mind						sami	sxmi	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1084 \u1251 \
saamna	c9vyf	down there (one ~)		
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  sam-; 
\f2\i obscured demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 samum \'91(of) the one down there\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 saamkut \'91those down there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative:
\f0\i0  \'91saamyuq you, down there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun:
\f0\i0  tesamna 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esamna \'91the one down there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  samani \'91in the place down there\'92;
\f2\i  terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  samavek \'91to down there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 samagun 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  saamggun \'91through down there\'92; samaken 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  saamken \'91from down there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional:
\f0\i0  sama \'91there (down there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 tesamani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esamani	south to southwest (one to the ~)												that one down there; that one to the south or southwest 						samna	sxmna	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
saani	c6ybb	aged food			food, aged												aged food				CK A & W 101		sani	sxni	\uc0\u1089 \u257 \u1085 \u1080 \u1080 \
saanighte-	c6ybb5ns-	age (get aged, of food)		neqet kiigmi saanighsugumaghtaqii \'91food easily gets aged in the summer\'92; \'85 
\f2\i saanighruugtekestaghluuteng
\f0\i0  aa urang neqnightut neqet. \'91\'85 then the food would be
\f2\i  aged 
\f0\i0 just right and have a special flavor to it.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:242)													to age (of food)		< saani-?-		CK A & W 101		sanighte-	sxnighte-	\uc0\u1089 \u257 \u1085 \u1080 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saanpipa	c9ygbgf	sandpaper		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 sandpaper	yf;lfxyfz ,evfuf	from English \'91sandpaper\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R475, V&E85)		
\f0\i0 sanpipa	sxnpipa	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \u1087 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \
saanqaghqe-	c6y2f52s-	face-to-face (be ~)		saanqaghqullutek yugek sameng pughiitaqeftuk \'91two men were conversing face to face\'92; igaghtem igaghyat sivungitgun nekevluni saanqaghqelluki apeghtughii \'91the teacher stood right in front of the students and taught them\'92	face (be facing)												to be face to face; to face				CK A & W 101		sanqaghqe-	sxnqaghqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u257 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b saape-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c9gs-\super \'a1	\nosupersub cover		saapuq \'91he covered himself\'92; saapaa \'91he covered it\'92 / saaputaa he put it as a cover on something\'92													to cover		< sape-				sape-1	sxpe-1	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1087 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub saape-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c9gs-\super \'99	\nosupersub drive (herd of reindeer) to a new place		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf.
\f0\i0  sapughagh-; quyngighqwaghtem saapumaa quyngiq esnamun \'91the reindeer herder drove the reindeer down to the coast\'92; uksaghyagu quyngighqwaaghtet sapughamit quyngit meghem tunganganun \'91when it became fall time, the reindeer herders drove the reindeer herd towards the ocean\'92													to drive (herd of reindeer) to a new place				CK Rub 476		sape-2	sxpe-2	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1087 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub saapghangite-	c6g5f3bns-	undeterable by cold (or other adverse conditions)		saapghangilliqnaqeneghmeng ighneghwaaghi qenwat kumlaqughyaghii \'91in as much as he didn\'92t let cold deter him, [he went outside and and then] his fingers did start to get frostbitten\'92													to not be detered by cold (or other adverse conditions)				CK A & W 101		sapghangite-	sxpghangite-	\uc0\u1089 \u257 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saaphanghilnguq*	c9g5fy4bk3e2	one who can withstand extreme cold															one who can withstand extreme cold		< saapghanghite-nguq		VK		saphanghilnguq*	sxphanghilnguq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
saapkute-	c9grens-	escape taking some of the hunting gear (of a sea mammal)		angyameng sivuyagtem puyguluku uyiiq awataghpighpenaan maklak naghullegluku peghqaamakanaga, ima saapkutuq \'91the man at the front of the boat forgot to attach a float to the line, so the bearded seal he had harpooned got away with the line\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 sapegi-													to escape taking some of the hunting gear (of a sea mammal)						sapkute-	sxpkute-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1087 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saaputaq	c9genf2	cover		= saputaq	lid	curtain								shade			cover; lid; curtain; shade		< saape-(u)taq				saputaq	sxputaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
saaqghaghte-	c925f5ns-	chip or get chipped, accidentally or suddenly		saaqghaghtuq \'91it got chipped\'92; saaqghaghtaa \'91he chipped it\'92 / = saqighaaghte-													to accidentally or suddenly chip		< saqe-?-aghte-				saqghaghte-	sxqghaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saaqw	c912	next to (area or space ~ (it))		saaghwani \'91right next to it\'92; Nekeghqughaqegkangi mangteghat, Quyillget, 
\f2\i saaghwitni
\f0\i0  quyngit. \'91She set out the (toy) houses, the Chukchi, and 
\f2\i next to
\f0\i0  
\f2\i them, 
\f0\i0 the reindeer.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 68); Aqumuq meteghlluk uyghagem 
\f2\i saaghwakun
\f0\i0 , quneghtuq. \'91The raven sat down 
\f2\i beside
\f0\i0  the rock.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 28); saaghwek (dual) \'91side gore in woman\'92s coverals\'92	right by (area or space ~ (it))	area next to or right by (it)								space next to or right by (it)			area or space next to or right by (it)	ghjcnhfucndj hzljv			CK V & E 112; CK		saqw	sxqw	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1179 \
saaqwin	c912by	walrus-skin cover of summer tent from top to bottom		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 walrus-skin cover of  summer tent from top to bottom		< saaqw-?-(u)n		CK Rub 472		saqwin	sxqwin	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \
saaqwliq	c921kb2	next to (something ~ another)		saaqwliqullutek \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  are side-by-side\'92; saaqwliilluku \'91bringing himself to her side, or keeping it by his side\'92	neighbor												something next to another; neighbor		< saaqw-qliq				saqwliq	sxqwliq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \u1265 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
saarma-	c9hvf-	depend on something		saarmaaq \'91he depends on something\'92 / saarmatkaa \'91he depends on it\'92													to depend on something						sarma-	sxrma-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1088 \u1084 \u1072 -\

\f1\b saasaqe-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c9cz2s-\super \'a1	\nosupersub seek a favor		saasaquq \'91he tried to bring attention to himself\'92 / saasaqutagka qiipaghaagka kakiightesqellukek \'91I tried to get her to sew my cloth cover parka\'92	attract attention (try to ~)												to try to attract attention; to seek a favor					> saasqaghmeraagh-	sasaqe-1	sxsaqe-1	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub saasaqe-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c9cf2s-\super \'99	\nosupersub put in an exposed place		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)
\f0\i0 ; aghikaq amiq aghnam saasaqutaqaa siqineghmun \'91the woman put the wet skin out (to dry) in the sun\'92	lay out												to put in an exposed place; to lay out				CK Rub 477		sasaqe-2	sxsaqe-2	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub saasqagh-	c6c2f4-	wind come straight in from the ocean		aywaaneng Aqeftapak saasaawuq \'91the wind is coming straight in from the north at Aqeftapak\'92; pakfallameng uughqa uukna saaqaghtaqaa \'91the wind is coming right in from the west on the western shores of the island\'92; saaqami unangkamun tuwiinaghtuq \'91when wind is coming right in to land, it is easy to retrieve seals\'92; guygu saasqaghngaq sivumineng siqineghmun \'91the house is turned towards to the sun in the front\'92	turned facing something (be ~)												for wind to be coming straight in from the ocean; to be turned facing something				CK A & W 101; gloss 2 CK Rub 477		sasqagh-	sxsqagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u257 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
saasqaghmeraagh-	c9c2f4vsh64-	stay around whether appreciated or not		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf.
\f0\i0  saasaqe-													to stay around whether appreciated or not				Rub 477		sasqaghmeragh-	sxsqaghmerxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
saasqaq	czc2f2	wind toward land from ocean		Kangighiinaq 
\f2\i saasqaaghhneghmini
\f0\i0  Naayvatun whaten evlugtutkaaqelghii. \'91Only when the 
\f2\i winds belew directly
\f0\i0  into the cove would some small swells appear, like the ones you see on Troutman Lake [by Gambell].\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:144)													wind toward land from ocean		< saya\super e\nosupersub -qaq		VK		sasqaq	sxsqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
saatghwaagh-	c9n5164-	wear a fur-side-in parka without a cloth cover															to wear a fur-side-in parka without a cloth cover		< sata\super 1\nosupersub -(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 2\nosupersub -				satghwagh-	sxtghwxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1203 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
saatnguraaq	c9n3eh62	skin mitten with fur in		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 skin mitten with fur in		< sata\super 1\nosupersub -?-raaq (?)				satnguraq	sxtngurxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1187 \u1091 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
saavgumiigh-	c6fuev74-	prepare, get equipment ready, to harpoon the whale		angyam kennaqutnginaq sivuyagtet saavgumiighaqut \'91as soon as a boat launches, the striker gets the harpoon ready\'92; naghulkani pilghayaghluku saavgumiinqiglluni naghullgaa \'91he unsuccessfully harpooned it, and got his equipment ready again and struck it\'92													to prepare, get equipment ready, to harpoon the whale		< saveg-(i/u)ma-?-		CK A & W 101; Rub 469		savgumigh-	sxvgumxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u257 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1251 \u1271 -\
saaygu	c9que	tunnel entrance to semi-subterranean house															tunnel entrance to semi-subterranean house		< saya-?				saygu	sxygu	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \
saayguraaq	c9queh62	porch (modern shed ~)		Taaqneghmegteki, 
\f2\i saayguraaghem
\f0\i0  qaaynganun qaakaqiit, nalighmeng siqlugam qaaynganun. \'91When they are finished with them they put them up on top of the 
\f2\i storm shed
\f0\i0  or on the roof of the underground cache.\'92 (MRS. DELLA W. 6)	entry porch	porch (entry ~)							; 
\f2\i see Parts of House in Appendix				
\f0\i0 modern storm shed; entry porch		< saaygu-raaq				sayguraq	sxygurxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
saaymiq	c9qvb2	harpoon for seals		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 harpoon for seals	ufhgey yf ythge			CK Rub 471		saymiq	sxymiq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1253 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \
saayngiitaq	c9q37nf2	apron			front cover												apron; front cover		< saya-(ng)iitaq; PE ca90&ilita3 (under PE ca90-)				sayngitaq	sxyngxtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1253 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
safk-	czar-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > safkaagh, safkiitaq, safkutaq, 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  saape-																			safk-	safk-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1092 \u1082 -\
safkaagh-	czar64-	cover		qergesek safkaaghqek \'91(pull the shade to) cover the window\'92	block (view)												to cover; to block (view)		< safk-?-				safkagh-	safkxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1092 \u1082 \u257 \u1271 -\
safkaaghun	czar64ey	curtain			drape	window shade											curtain; drape; window shade		< safkaagh-(u)n				safkaghun	safkxghun	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1092 \u1082 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
safkeghyuug-	czars4m0u-	bad mood (be in a ~)		ulimasini iflakuku safkeghyuugtaqeftuq \'91he lost his carving tools and so he\'92s been in a bad mood\'92; safkeghyuugullghiik qenwat pillugusimalghiik \'91they were mad at each other so they fought\'92	frustrated (feel ~)	angry (be ~)											to be in a bad mood; to feel frustated; to be angry				CK A & W 101		safkeghyug-	safkeghyxg-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1092 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1075 -\
safkiitaq	czar7nf2	loincloth worn by men inside house in old times															loincloth worn by men inside house in old times		< safk-(ng)iitaq				safkitaq	safkxtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1092 \u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
safkutaq	czarenf2	cover		taakwna tatek asitmun ayuqelghii safkutaawaquq taagavek esghamun \'91that ridge down there is an obstruction to a more distant view\'92; kangighaq tesqamna taatgek taakuk safkutak ilugkenilnguq angyanun anuqmi uqitaghviwaaquq \'91the cove in between those ridges can be used by boats as a shelter from the wind and high seas\'92; peghqinghutmeggneng sangwaa seghleghnaq safkutighaat nagatkaaluni piningllaqameng \'91they cleverly covered up the disgraceful event by making it sound like something respectable\'92	windscreeen or other shelter from wind	barrier to view								cover-up of facts			cover; windscreen or other shelter from wind; barrier to view; cover-up of facts		< safk-(u)taq				safkutaq	safkutaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1092 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
safleg-	czak]ksu-	handle and examine without permission		saflegtuq \'91he rummaged through something\'92; saflegaa \'91he rumaged through it\'92 /	paw (with the hands)	rummage through (it)											to handle and examine permission; to "paw"; to rummage through (it)		PY-S cav@0!- (under PE cav0t-); < safte-?-				safleg-	safleg-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
saflengaq	czak]ks3f2	handle (one who likes to ~ everything without permission)															one who likes to handle everything without permission		< safleg-?-				saflengaq	saflengaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \
safte-	czans-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > safleg-, saafte-															PE cav0t-				safte-	safte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sagelmak	czuskvfr	ruddy turnstone		sagelmagyagaa kiigmi whani \'91there are lots of turnstones this summer\'92; sagelmagyaget esghaamakangit \'91they had seen a lot of turnstones\'92	turnstone, ruddy	
\f2\i Arenaria interpres											
\f0\i0 ruddy turnstone 
\f2\i (Arenaria interpres)		
\f0\i0 PY ca!0lmak				sagelmak	sagelmak	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \
sageyengestaq	czusqs3scnf2	drum (small ~ or ~-like thing)		
\f2\i such as a the ring on a mast used to raise the sails, or the basket on a ski pole	
\f0\i0 hoop (small ~ or ~-like thing)												small drum, hoop, drum-like or hoop-like thing		< saguyaq-ngestaq				sageyengestaq	sageyengestaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1099 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
saghefte-	cz4sans-	anger		sagheftaa \'91he made her angry\'92; saghefluku aanuq \'91making her angry he left\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sagheve-													to anger						saghefte-	saghefte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sagheme-	cz4svs-	envious (be very ~)															to be very envious				VK\'92s notes		sagheme-	sagheme-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 -\
sagheve-	cz4sds-	crumble		saghevuq \'91it crumbled\'92 / sagheftaa \'91he crumbled it\'92; qenaaq mayughlluku mangteghangllaqaqa esnami saghevuq \'91the sand castle I made on the beach collapsed\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  saqeme-	topple	collapse											to crumble; to topple; to collapse						sagheve-	sagheve-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
saghevleghwaaq	cz4sdks4162	granulated sugar		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 granulated sugar													granulated sugar	cf[fhysq gtcjr	< sagheve- (?)		CK Rub 471		saghevleghwaq	saghevleghwxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
saghiigha-	cz474f-	astonished		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  saghiighayugtuq \'91he was astonished, amazed, shocked, etc.\'92 saghiighanaghtuq \'91it is astonishing, amazing\'92; saghiighakaa \'91he feels astonished at it\'92; saghiighayugtuq elngaatall esghaghluku sikumi ukimalleq aniguvzeghaam saapegkaa esneghruggaakun qimugsighluni naghughtekani mamlegmi ighivgaq \'91he is in a state of shock seeing how the snow concealed the sea ice hole which he narrowly missed with his dogteam in the dark last night\'92; 
\f2\i Saghiighayugllaget
\f0\i0 , allaaghlluwhaghyugllaget, "Aagkut sukatepigtat!" 
\f2\i \'91In utter astonishment
\f0\i0  [they said], \'93How fast that boat is going by!\'94\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:228); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  saghiighqe-	amazed												astonished; amazed						saghigha-	saghxgha-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 -\
saghiighqe-	cz4752s-	intensely (act ~)		saghiighquq \'91he is acting intensely\'92 / anuqem saghiighqutaa tengegkayuggaq tengaamaluku \'91the wind was intensely affecting the little plane which was flying\'92; ulimaani sahgiighqutaa \'91he\'92s really putting effort into his carving\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 saghiigha-	enthusiastic (be ~)												to be enthusiastic; to act intensely						saghighqe-	saghxghqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
saghligaq	cz4kbuf2	bitch			female dog or other quadruped												bitch; female dog; female quadruped		PE ca3li!a3				saghligaq	saghligaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
saghna-	cz4yf-	gather		saghnaaq \'91he gathered things\'92; saghnii \'91he gathered them\'92 / sungaat ifkaquusata saghnii segesqughlluni \'91when the beads fell and scattered he knelt down and picked them up\'92; vegmeng saghnaaq \'91he gathered some grass\'92	pick up (many thing)	collect											to gather; to pick up (many thing); to collect						saghna-	saghna-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 -\
saghnasitaq	cz4yfcbnf2	container, small, for gathered things (such as berries)															small container for gathered things (such as berries)		< saghna-?-(u)taq				saghnasitaq	saghnasitaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
saghnasta	cz4yfcnf	collector		ayumiim naangqughlluganun taakut saghnastet kaasimaat \'91those collectors of old ivory have arrived\'92													collector		< saghna-(s)ta		VK		saghnasta	saghnasta	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
saghu-	cz4e-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > saghumik, saghuya																			saghu-	saghu-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 -\
saghumigneq	cz4evbuys2	left side		amigem saghumigneghanituq \'91it is to the left of the door\'92													left side		< saghumig-neq\super 2				\nosupersub saghumigneq	saghumigneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
saghumik	cz4evbr	left handed person															left handed person		PE ca3umi!; < saghu-mik				saghumik	saghumik	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
saghuya	cz4ez	left hand		saghuyagmineng igaghaquq \'91he writes with his left hand\'92													left hand		< saghu-?-				saghuya	saghuya	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1103 \
saghya	cz4mz	thing		saghyatuut \'91they have lots of possessions\'92; saghyat kaatut \'91the supplies have arrived\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sa	object (thing)	supplies								possession			thing; object; household goods; supplies; possession						saghya	saghya	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \
saghyughte-	cz4m/5ns-	get lots		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  saghna-; estugaghlluni saghyughtuq \'91she went to the store and got lots of stuff\'92													to get lots						saghyughte-	saghyughte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sagiqe-	czub2s-	persist		sagiquq \'91he is persisting in his activity\'92 / sagiqutkaa \'91he is persisting in his actions on it\'92; yuuk tughumghanaluku sagiqutaa \'91he insisted on wrestling with the man\'92	persevere	insist								urge on			to persist; to persevere; to insist; to urge on		PY-S ca!iq0-				sagiqe-	sagiqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
sagiqneq	czub2y]s2	persistent, persevering, responsibel person															persistent, persevering, responsible person		< sagiqe-neq\super 2				\nosupersub sagiqneq	sagiqneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1080 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
saglighaq	czukb4f2	rock, large, flat		naayghamun unataghyat sagligham qaayngani angyaataghqumalghiit \'91those who went to the mountain to pick greens, ate their snacks on top of a large flat rock\'92													large flat rock				CK A & W 102; Rub 470		saglighaq	saglighaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
sagneq	czuys2	pot		
\f2\i may be used in the dual,
\f0\i0  sagneghek, 
\f2\i for one bowl;
\f0\i0  = segneq, signeq	pan	dish								bowl			pot; pan; food container; dish; bowl						sagneq	sagneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
sagniin, sagniita	czuy7y. cfuy7nf	twine sewn in along stitches of sole of skin-boot to keep the thread from cutting into the skin															twine sewn in along stitches of sole of skin-boot to keep the thread from cutting into the skin						sagnin; sagnita	sagnxn; sagnxta	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1085 , \u1089 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \
saguulnga	czu8k3f	table, low, for tea or coffee		= sayuulnga	mat placed on floor for teacups and the like	coffee table											low table or tray for tea; coffee table		from Chukchi cayool!0n \'91tea table\'92, which is from Russian xfq (chay) \'91tea\'92 with a Chukchi suffix				sagulnga	sagxlnga	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1263 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \
saguyaaghte-	czue95ns-	turn when traveling		piyaa sikugni igleghteghngaaghmi yuuk esghaghluku saguyaaghfikaa \'91when the man was hunting on the ice and saw a person, he turned and went towards him\'92; angyat taglaghngaaghmeng saguyaaghtut ugatmun \'91when the boat was going towards land, they suddenly turned northwest\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  saguyaq	side trip (take a ~)												to turn when traveling; to take a side trip				CK A & W 102		saguyaghte-	saguyxghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saguyaghalek	czue94fksr	Saturn		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91one with something like a drum\'92, in reference to Saturn\'92s rings													the planet Saturn		< saguyaq-ghaq-lek		from Darlene Orr		saguyaghalek	saguyaghalek	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
saguyaghtaagh-	czuez5n64-	prepare a skin drum for use (as by moistening its skin)															to prepare a skin drum for use (as by moistening its skin)		< saguyaq-?				saguyaghtagh-	saguyaghtxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
saguyaq	czuez2	drum (especially Eskimo skin ~)		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  saguyak, 
\f2\i used for one drum; 
\f0\i0 Nanevgaghllagem nuliini pimakanga, "Aghnalqwaay, enta saguyagka tagivaghqek!" \'91The old man said to his wife, \'93Old woman, hand me my drum!\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 22)													Eskimo skin drum		PY-S ca!uyaq				saguyaq	saguyaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1103 \u1179 \
sakegh-	czrs4-	cut in one stroke		savikegtam ayveghem mangunanga kaapluku sakeghyaqminigu iwerngaqun tukughaanun \'91a person with a very good knife put his knife to the skin of the walrus and just slit it down to the foot flipper joint in one stroke\'92	slash												to cut in one stroke; to slash						sakegh-	sakegh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 -\
sakelghaaq	czrsk462	junk			trash	odds and ends								knick-knack			junk; trash; odds and ends; knick-knack		< sa-?-				sakelghaq	sakelghxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \
sakemna	czrsvyf	down there (one ~)		
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  sakm-; 
\f2\i obscured demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 sakmum \'91(of) the one out there\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun:
\f0\i0  sakemkut \'91those out there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative: 
\f0\i0 sakemyuq \'91you, out there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: 
\f0\i0 tesakemna 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esakemna \'91that one out there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  sakmani \'91at the place out there\'92, \'91Gambell from Savoonga\'92, \'91in the west\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  sakmavek \'91to out there\'92, \'91to Gambell from Savooonga\'92, \'91westward\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb:
\f0\i0  sakmagun \'91through out there\'92, etc.; 
\f2\i ablative adverb:
\f0\i0  sakmaken \'91from out there\'92, etc.; 
\f2\i interjectional: 
\f0\i0 sakma \'91(it is) there (out there)!\'92, etc.; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 tesakmani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esakmani \'91there, out there\'92, etc.	west (one toward ~)	outer room (one out in the ~)								east (one to the ~)
\f2\i (in Chukotka)			
\f0\i0 that one down there; that one to the west; that one in the outer room; that one toward Gambell from Savoonga; that one towards east
\f2\i  (additional meaning in Chukotka)		
\f0\i0 PE dem. sak0m-				sakemna	sakemna	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
sakemruwaaq	czrsvhe162	desirable things (a variety of ~)		paper sack-a allaaghhiinaghmeng sakemruwaaghmeng imighluku tuunumakanga \'91she filled a paper sack of all kinds of desirable stuff (foods) and gave it to her\'92	luxuries	delicacies											a variety of desirable things; luxuries; delicacies		< sa-?		CK A &W 102		sakemruwaq	sakemruwxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1088 \u1091 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
sakenge-	czrs3s-	catch fish or game		sakenguq \'91he caught or got something\'92	get something	buy something											to catch fish or game; to get something; to buy something		< sa-?-nge-				sakenge-	sakenge-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 -\
sakeqe-	czrs2s-	break in two (of rope, string, thread, wire, tape, etc.)		sakequq \'91it broke in two\'92; sakeqaa \'91he broke it in in two\'92 / sungaanka sakequt \'91my beaded necklace broke\'92; sakeqngaaq \'91it is broken\'92; sakeqaghaghtuq \'91it broke suddenly (as from being stretched)\'92													to break in two (of rope, string, thread, wire, tape, etc.)						sakeqe-	sakeqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
sakete-	czrsns-	thinner (make ~)															to make thinner		PE cak0v0t-				sakete-	sakete-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saki	czrb	father-in-law		sakinka \'91my inlaws\'92	mother-in-law	parent of one\'92s spouse								inlaw			father-in-law; mother-in-law; parent of one's spouse; inlaw		PE caki				saki	saki	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1080 \
sakighaq*	czrb4f2	man's wife's brother			brother-in-law
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 (man\'92s wife\'92s brother
\f2\i )												
\f0\i0 man's wife's brother; brother-in-law
\f2\i  (in this one limited sense)		
\f0\i0 < saki-ghaq				sakighaq*	sakighaq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
sakighneq	czrb4ys2	row of things or people															row of things or people		< sakighte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub sakighneq	sakighneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
sakighte-	czrb5ns-	line up side by side		sakightut \'91they lined up side by side\'92; sakightii \'91he lined them up\'92 / choir-et yugit sakightut \'91the choir members lined up side by side\'92; igaqistem igaqsaghqat yuget sakightestii \'91the photographer lined up the people whose picture he was going to take\'92													to line up side by side						sakighte-	sakighte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sakiiq	czr72	woman\'92s husband\'92s sister			sister-in-law (
\f2\i in the limited sense of
\f0\i0  woman\'92s husband\'92s sister)												woman's husband's sister; sister-in-law
\f2\i  (in this one limited sense)		
\f0\i0 PE caki3a3 (under PE caki); < saki-?				sakiq	sakxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1251 \u1179 \
sakimak	czrbvfr	chest
\f2\i  (anatomical)		also plural,
\f0\i0  sakimaget, 
\f2\i for one person's chest;
\f0\i0  sakimagenka \'91my chest\'92													chest
\f2\i  (anatomical)		
\f0\i0 PE caki(C)a!				sakimak	sakimak	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \
sakniqe-	czryyb2s-	exert oneself		sakniquq \'91he is exerting himself\'92 / sakniqutaa \'91he is exerting himself over it\'92; sakniqutaat qamuqaghteng uqightuqaq \'91they are putting a lot of effort into pulling that heavy thing\'92; mekelghiighhaq sakniqnguuq elngaatall snow-machine-engnaluni \'91the little boy really wants to get a snow machine\'92; peng\'92gem sakniqestaa aghnaq qayughllak ighneghii aga anuqataghaghmi imana kellaatalghiit \'91the woman is very anxious and worried because her sons have gone out on a boat when it is very windy\'92; imaghllugem sakniqestii angyat \'91the sea swells were really rocking the boat\'92	forceful (be ~)	yearn for something								anxious (be ~)			to exert oneself; to be forceful; to yearn for something; to be forceful; to be anxious		PE cak0(t)-				sakniqe-	sakniqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1085 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
sakraa-	czri6-	irritated (be ~)		sakraaguq \'91he is frustrated\'92	frustrated (be ~)	bad mood (be in a ~)											to be frustrated; to be irritated; to be in a bad mood						sakra-	sakrx-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1096 \u257 -\
sakrite-	czribns-	frustrated (be ~)		sakrituq \'91he is frustrated\'92 /  qenwat sakrituq mekelngiighhaq anengaan qinuyuglluku \'91finally the little boy became irritated after his brother provoked him\'92	irritated (get ~)												to be frustrated; to get irritated						sakrite-	sakrite-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1096 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sakusiiqe-	czrec72s-	use in a careless and wasteful manner		sangwaat atughqat sakusiiqigatiit \'91they don\'92t use useful things in a wasteful and careless manner\'92; ghuuni sakusiiqepagluki ghhuughiitqaghsimalghii \'91he wastefully used his ammunition so he ran out\'92; uyughani sakusiiqaa \'91she mistreated her younger brother\'92; kilgaaqumi aleni sakusiiqaa \'91he really outran his companion in a loong distance footrace\'92	abuse	mistreat								outdo in sports			to use in a careless and wasteful manner; to abuse; to mistreat; to oudo in sports				CK A & W 103		sakusiqe-	sakusxqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \u1099 -\
sakwaalghutaq	czr16k4enf2	trash container			waste basket	dumpster											trash container; waste basket; dumpster		< sakwaaq-lghutaq				sakwalghutaq	sakwxlghutaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sakwaaq	czr162	junk			worthless thing	lowly person								old worthless foodstuff			junk; worthless thing; lowly person; old worthless foodstuff		< sa-kwaaq				sakwaq	sakwxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
sakwaaqe-	czr162s-	treat as junk		temngi sakwaaqlaataghaak aynganangakenghhagni qapragteghllak quunpeng \'91as usual he is being careless with his new record player treating it roughly all the time\'92; kilgaaqulluteng ataasim yugem ilani elngaatall sakwaaqii \'91during the race one man really outdid the rest of the men\'92	careless (be ~ with)	look down on								outdo in an athletic contest			to treat as junk; to be careless with; to handle roughly; to look down on (a person); to outdo in an athletic contest		< sakwaaq-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				sakwaqe-	sakwxqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 -\
salagu-	czkzue-	club (hit hard)		yugem neghsaq salaguyaqminigu tuqutaa \'91when the man clobbered the seal he killed it\'92	clobber	hit with something thrown											to club; to clobber; to hit with something thrown						salagu-	salagu-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 -\
salanta	czkzynf	cylinder		
\f2\i usually refers to the cylinder of an engine													
\f0\i0 cylinder		from English \'91cylinder\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 160		salanta	salanta	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1103 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \

\f1\b salghaaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub czk462\'a1	sickness (especially the flu or the like)		salghaaq qaga piniqaat \'91they say there is a sickness going around out there\'92; salghaaq akmaken kaatulluku mingituq \'91sickness came in from mainland and is spreading\'92													sickness (especially the flu or the like)		< sa-?		CK A & W 103		salghaq1	salghxq1	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 1\

\f1\b salghaaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub czk462\'99	useless thing		salghaaq tamana qerngughlluku eggnaken \'91get all the useless items together and throw them away\'92	garbage												useless thing; garbage		< sa-?		CK A & W 103		salghaq2	salghxq2	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 2\
Salghaat	Czk46n	Salghat Beach on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Salghat Beach on St. Lawrence Is.						Salghat	Salghxt	\uc0\u1057 \u1103 \u1083 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \
salghutaq	czk4enf2	pantry			storage place												pantry; storage place		< sa-lghutaq				salghutaq	salghutaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
salin	czkby	still		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 salin aviitaqaa? \'91is he still not here?\'92; salin mekestaaghhaalunga tawansaghtunga \'91when I was still small I was there\'92; angyat salin aviitutaqut \'91the boats are still gone\'92; kaasigataat? \'91have they arrived?\'92 -- salin \'91not yet\'92	not yet	yet (not ~)											still; not yet		PE cu(na)li (under PE cu(na))				salin	salin	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \
sallagte-	czk]z[ns-	clean in a rough, partial or preliminary way (e.g. a skin)		sallagtuq \'91he cleaned something\'92; sallagtaa \'91he cleaned it\'92 / amiiraq sallagtaa sivukluku aghvigvagilgamigu \'91she gave the skin a preliminary cleaning before washing it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sallegte-													to clean in a rough, partial or preliminary way (e.g. a skin)		PE ca@i!-\super 2				\nosupersub sallagte-	sallagte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sallaqi-	czk]z2b-	comfortable (have a ~ life)		sallaqiiq \'91he is at ease\'92 / kaviighhaq sallaqiighwaghaqeftuq siqineghllugmi \'91the little fox was taking it easy, sunning himself\'92; qerngughqullghiinun yuuk sallaqiiq \'91the man had the time and opportunity to mingle with the people in the crowd\'92; sallaqingigalnguq \'91one who cannot leave home to socialize (often with an implication of illness)\'92	relax	easy (take it ~)								socialize (have time and opportunity to ~)			to have a comfortable life; to relax; to take it easy; to have time and opportunity to socialize		PE ca@a-				sallaqi-	sallaqi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \u1080 -\
salleghte-	czk]s5ns-	leave (after difficulty)		angyaghteng pegnem saallghutaat \'91they finally but just barely got their boat moving\'92; nutaan nemineng salleghtuq qinuyugutmineng \'91he finally left his house after being sick\'92	move forward												to leave (after difficulty); to move forward				CK A & W 103		salleghte-	salleghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sallegpak	czk]s[gfr	consolidated slush ice, consolitdated, not quite thick enough to be safely walked on, can be broken up by the passage of a boat		
\f2\i see item 63 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	new ice thin not quite thick enough to be safely walked on, can be broken up by the passage of a boat	sea ice type											consolidated slush ice or new ice thin not quite thick enough to be safely walked on, can be broken up by the passage of a boat		< sallek\super 1\nosupersub -ghpak				sallegpak	sallegpak	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
sallegte-	czk]s[ns-	scrape (especially fat from a skin)		sallegtaa \'91she scraped it\'92 / saallgaghtaa kililleghmi qaltenga \'91he accidently scraped the scab off his wound\'92; = salligte-
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sallagte-, sata\super 1													\nosupersub to scrape (especially fat from a skin)		PE ca@i!-\super 1				\nosupersub sallegte-	sallegte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b sallek\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub czk]sr\'a1	slush ice becoming consolidated		saallguuq \'91it is slush ice becoming consolidated\'92; 
\f2\i see item 64 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	ice (slush ~ becoming consolidated)	new ice not thick enough to walk on											slush ice becoming consolidated; new ice not thick enough to walk on forming on calm water		PY-S ca@0k				sallek1	sallek1	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 1\

\f1\b sallek\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub czk]sr\'99	capable person		
\f2\i from the "empty base",
\f0\i0  sa-, 
\f2\i which is "stress-repelling" (see 
\f0\i0 Jacobson  1984b) 
\f2\i so that the 
\f0\i0 a
\f2\i  does not lengthen during suffixation: 
\f0\i0 sallguuq \'91he is a capable person\'92	expert												capable person; expert		< sa-llek				sallek2	sallek2	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 2\
sallgaaq	czk][62	slush ice area just beginning to consolidate															slush ice area just beginning to consolidate, after the 
\f2\i qenu
\f0\i0  stage		< sallek\super 1\nosupersub -?-				sallgaq	sallgxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u257 \u1179 \
sallgaq	czk][f2	jaw of whale, lower		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 sallgak
\f2\i , for one jaw; cf. 
\f0\i0 saalpak													lower jaw of whale				CK Rub 473 CK 		sallgaq	sallgaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
sallghite-	czk]5bns-	unblemished (be ~)		sallghitnghwaaq \'91somehthing that is whole, intact, unmarred\'92; sallghwaaghhiituq \'91it is in very good condition\'92	not have done anything												to be unbleminshed; to not have done anything		< sa-lleq\super 1\nosupersub -(ng)ite-		VK		sallghite-	sallghite-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sallghwaaghhiite-	czk]51657ns-	perfect condition (be in ~)		tiintaviget sallghwaaghhiitut \'91the tenting grounds are in perfect conditions\'92; naalkusimalghii taghnughhaghwaaghmeng sallghwaaghhiilngughmeng \'91he found a ivory doll artifact that was in perfect condition\'92													to be in perfect condition				CK A & W 103		sallghwaghhite-	sallghwxghhxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1265 \u257 \u1203 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
salligte-	czk]b[ns-	scrape (especially fat from a skin)		= sallegte-
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sallagte-, sata\super 1													\nosupersub to scrape (especially fat from a skin)		PE ca@i!-\super 1				\nosupersub salligte-	salligte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
salliigh-	czk]74-	travel through slush ice by boat		angyat taan\'92ga salliighaqut \'91the boat out there is travelling through slush ice\'92; salliighem tagtalangani qenwat amigket ukimalghiik \'91in the midst of travelling through the slush ice, the skin on their boat finally developed a hole\'92													to travel through slush ice by boat		< sallek\super 1\nosupersub -?-		CK A & W 103 CK		salligh-	sallxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
sallmag- 	czk]v]fu- 	patch a boot sole		sallmagaa \'91he patched it\'92 /													to patch a boot sole						sallmag- 	sallmag- 	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1075 -\
sallmak	czk]v]fr	patch on boot sole															patch on boot sole		PY ca@mak				sallmak	sallmak	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1082 \
sallmeg-	czk]v]su-	scrape one's skin accidently			scrape the paint off something												to scrape one's skin accidently; to scrape the paint off something						sallmeg-	sallmeg-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1084 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 -\
sallughmete-	czk]/4vsns-	cross-eyed (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  sallughmelnguq \'91one who is cross-eyed or wall-eyed\'92	wall-eyed (be ~)												to be cross-eyed; to be wall-eyed	rjcjukfpsq			CK Rub 473		sallughmete-	sallughmete-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
salngak	czk3fr	box		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  salngagek,
\f2\i  for one box, motor well, etc.; 
\f0\i0 salngagegka \'91my suitcase\'92	suitcase	motor well in boat								coffin			box; suitcase; motor well in boat; coffin		from Chukchi ce&0l \'91box\'92				salngak	salngak	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \
salngawrak	czk3f1hfr	empty box or container		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 box, empty								check this -- w not likely next to short a				empty box or container		< salngak		CK Rub 473		salngawrak	salngawrak	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1265 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
salug-	czk/u-	thirst (be dying of ~)		salugtuq \'91he is dying of thirst\'92	need water desperately												to be in desperate need of water to drink; to be dying of thirst		PE calu!-				salug-	salug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -\
samataq	czvfnf2	ornament for forehead made of iron given by shaman to patient as a remedy											check! also in CAY				forehead ornament of iron given by shaman to patient as a remedy		+ PY camataq \'91metal (fore)head ornament\'92 (cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik camataq \'91ceremonial headdress of brass or copy and beads\'92)		Bogoraz song text 11		samataq	samataq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sameghqe-	czvs52s-	die without a trace due to an accident		Esneghak teskiwhkuk sameghqutkegkaaniiqagket \'91the Esneghak channel is said to have claimed lives\'92; angyaghllugluteng sameghqumalghiit \'91they went on a make-shift boat and had a tragedy\'92	fatal accident (have a ~ away from a settlement)												to die without a trace due to an accident; to have a fatal accident away from a settlement				CK A & W 103		sameghqe-	sameghqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
samillagh-	czvbk]z4-	unsuccessfully do something (especially in hunting)		nunavaget uyatiilluki samillaqanghitiit \'91they approached a herd of walrus on the ice, but they didn\'92t get to them\'92; aghveq puneglluku talwa samillanghituq \'91he struck with an explosive at the whale, but the bomb didn\'92t go off\'92													to unsuccessfully do something (especially in hunting)				CK A & W 103		samillagh-	samillagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
samitagh-	czvbnf4-	sneak up on		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 to sneak up on	gjlhflsdfncz			CK V & E 160		samitagh-	samitagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
samleghagh-	czvks4f4-	active (be ~)		(?)									check this; can\'92t find any examples in the texts				to be active				VK\'92s notes		samleghagh-	samleghagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
samlleghqe-	czvk]s52s-	scratch		
\f2\i Chuktokan (R);
\f0\i0  samlleghqaa \'91she scratched him\'92	abrade												to scratch; to abrade				CK Rub 474		samlleghqe-	samlleghqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
samseghhaghaq	czvcs5f4f2	guillemot (black ~)			
\f2\i Cephus grylle	
\f0\i0 black guillemot											black guillemot 
\f2\i (Cephus grylle)						
\f0\i0 samseghhaghaq	samseghhaghaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1089 \u1099 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
samuwaq	czve1f2	samovar															samovar		from Russian cfvjdfh \'91samovar\'92				samuwaq	samuwaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1091 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
sanaghte-	czyf5ns-	process a skin		sanaghtaa \'91he processed it\'92 / sanaghtiiq \'91he processed a skin or skins\'92	cure a skin	tan a skin								skin (process, cure or tan a ~)			to process a skin; to cure a skin; to tan a skin		PE cana- (?)				sanaghte-	sanaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sanamaqute-	czyfvf2ens-	prepare something		aghnam avaqutani neqmeng sanamaqutaqii neghesqelluki \'91the woman prepares food for her children so they can eat\'92; sanamaqunnaqamken enan taqmiighnaken \'91I\'92m going to get it ready for you, so you finish it\'92	ready (get something ~ )												to prepare something; to get something ready		< sa-?-(i/u)ma-?-(u)te-		CK A & W 104		sanamaqute-	sanamaqute-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sanariigh-	czyfh74-	procrastinate		sanariighinaamalunga qenwat whaten lliighaa \'91I\'92ve been procrastinating, and now it\'92s gotten this late\'92; qinuketiqem sanariilghii uveglluku piyaqlegestun \'91he should\'92ve done it earlier, but he was procrastinating due to lack of interest in it\'92													to procrastinate				CK A & W 104		sanarigh-	sanarxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1072 \u1088 \u1251 \u1271 -\
sanepuuta, sanepuun	czysg8nf. czysg8y	keel (lowerable ~ of a boat)		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka; 
\f0\i0 = senapun													lowerable keel of a boat		perhaps from English \'91centerboard\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i (R475);		
\f0\i0 saneputa, sanepun	sanepxta, sanepxn	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 , \u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1099 \u1087 \u1263 \u1085 \
sang-ngan	cz3-3fy	poor thing!		
\f2\i particle; used when one is feeling sorry for another; pronounced with 
\f0\i0 ng 
\f2\i geminated; 
\f0\i0 Aghnam pimakanga, "Amaghluten, aglaallaken."  Aghnaghaam akisimakanga, "Whangamneng aglaghllequnga." Aghnam pimakanga, "
\f2\i Sang-ngan
\f0\i0 , naagllequten." \'91\'93Carrying you on the back, let me take you over.\'94 The girl answered, \'93I shall go on my own.\'94 The woman replied, \'93
\f2\i Poor thing
\f0\i0 , you will trip and fall.\'94\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 70)													poor thing!						sang-ngan	sang-ngan	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 -\u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \
sangan	cz3fy	why?		
\f2\i particle; this is an inflected form (with the alternative consequential mood)  of the base
\f0\i0  sa- 'to do what', 
\f2\i so that it literally mean
\f0\i0  'because of what?'; sangan taginanighsin? why don't you come?, 
\f2\i when the cause is presumed not necessarily to lie directly with the person addressed
\f0\i0 ; 
\f2\i other forms
\f0\i0  
\f2\i exist for when the cause is presumed to lie with the subject of an intransitive verb or the object of a transitive verb; for example: 
\f0\i0 sangavek taginanghisin? why didn't you come? 
\f2\i (when the cause is presumed to lie with the person addressed); 
\f0\i0 sangama kayusinghisinga? \'91why didn\'92t you help me?\'92
\f2\i (see grammar book, Jacobson 2001)													
\f0\i0 why?		PE ca&an (under PE cu(na)); < sa-
\f2\i consequential			
\f0\i0 xxxe	sangan, sangita, sangami, sangameng, sangavek, etc	sangan, sangita, sangami, sangameng, sangavek, etc	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \
sanghanun	czy4fyey	something (for ~)		qayngun sanghanun maapiiquten? \'91are you here for something again?\'92; sanghanun aghvighnaqsin \'91what are you going to go across for?\'92	what (for ~?)												for something; for what?		< sa-?-terminalis		CK A & W 104		sanghanun	sanghanun	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \
sanghiighi-	czy474b-	recover		qawaagniilghiim qawaagtani aqfanasiighluku sanghiighiluni tengumalghii \'91the bird hunter was going over to get the bird he shot, but it recovered and flew away\'92; qikmighaat iilqeghllaguyalghiit sanghiighimaniiqiit \'91the dogs were in low spirits, but they perked up\'92	perk up												to recover; to perk up				CK A & W 104		sanghighi-	sanghxghi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1271 \u1251 \u1271 \u1080 -\
sangighqugh-	cz3b52e4-	wash dishes, hard surfaces, etc.		aghnam suna nunamelnguq sangighqughaa \'91the lady wiped up the dirt from the floor\'92	wipe clean												to wash dishes, hard surfaces, etc.; to wipe clean		< sangigte-qugh-				sangighqugh-	sangighqugh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
sangigte-	cz3b[ns-	wipe		sangigtuq \'91he wiped himself off\'92; singigtaa \'91he wiped it\'92 / sangigngaaq \'91it is wiped already\'92	clean off (spilled liquid)												to wipe; to clean off (spilled liquid)						sangigte-	sangigte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sangiighhaq*	cz375f2	small thing		sangiighhaq taagna esgha sikugni \'91see there is a little thing of some sort out there on the sea ice\'92; kaay, sangiighhaq legan tawaten angkalghii tagivaghaa qayughniighyama \'91see, she gave me only a small amount like this when I asked for tea\'92	tiny amount	little bit											small thing; tiny amount; little bit		< sa-ngiighhaq				sangighhaq*	sangxghhaq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1251 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
sangiighi-	cz374b-	recover from illness, mishap, etc.															to recover from illness, mishap, etc.		< sa-?-(gh/l)i-		VK		sangighi-	sangxghi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1251 \u1271 \u1080 -\
sangiite-	cz37ns-	deprived (be ~ of)			not have any more of												to be deprived (of); to not have any more of	kbifncz	< sa-(ng)igh-(u)te-		CK V & E 177 CK		sangite-	sangxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sangunanigh-	cz3eyfyb4-	unconscious because of severe pain or a wound (be)		ifliikaghteng ayvasaasluku ayveq naalkesaqmegteggu taawa sangunaniimalghiillu \'91when they found their wounded walrus, it had become unconscious\'92; iwerngaqun sangunanighyan naghullegluku tuqusimakangat \'91it was only when it was unconscious that they harpooned it and killed it\'92	delirious (become ~)	exhausted totally								limp			to be unconscious because of severe pain or a wound; to become delirious; to be totally exhausted; to be limp		< sa-(ng)u-nanigh-		CK A & W 104		sangunanigh-	sangunanigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
sangusiq	cz3ecb2	any kind		sangusiq teghigaq naghughtuq nunivagkun \'91some animals passed by in the tundra\'92; sangusiiwa taana? \'91what is that?\'92; Kaviipik, silver fox, 
\f2\i sangusiq
\f0\i0  amiiraq, beaver-a amiiraq, neghsam amiiraa taagantuteftuq akingat akikegkaat. \'91Red fox, silver fox, 
\f2\i whatever kind
\f0\i0  of skin, beaver skin, sealskin, they were there, to be traded or sold.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:214); 
\f2\i Sangusiq
\f0\i0  taakwagun, aagaqegkan, tuqutaqigu. \'91
\f2\i Anything
\f0\i0  that happens to come your way, kill it.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 61)	whatever kind	some								what			some; what; any kind; whatever kind		< sa-(ng)u-(u)siq				sangusiq	sangusiq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
sangwaa	cz316	what (thing)?		
\f2\i for singular, used for absolutive only (
\f0\i0 saam 
\f2\i (q.v.) is the relative;
\f0\i0  sa 
\f2\i is used as the base for forming other cases); for plural or dual, used for absolutive or relative; 
\f0\i0 sangwaa aklukesteggu estugaghmeng? \'91what do you\sub pl.\nosupersub  need from the store?\'92; piyaqmegteggu sangwaa esghaamakangat talughtekestiinalghii \'91it turns out that they had seen something as it was disappearing from view\'92; 
\f2\i Sangwaa
\f0\i0  legan agleghnalghii 
\f2\i sangwaa
\f0\i0  uksumi tamaani pingigalkangat. 
\f2\i Sangwaat
\f0\i0  sariighet, naghaalqusiighem sariighi agleghnaghpetut, nanevgat pisnanillghit. \'91
\f2\i Something
\f0\i0  then, a revered thing, 
\f2\i something
\f0\i0 , in the winter at that time they didn\'92t do it.  
\f2\i Some
\f0\i0  competitions, athletic competions, were revered, (and therefore) forbidden by the elders. \'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:18); 
\f2\i Sangwaa
\f0\i0  taawa umyugaghpeni suumqepigtaqsigu? \'91
\f2\i What
\f0\i0  in your mind are you thinking so deeply about?\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:29)	something	what											what (thing)?; something		< sa-(ng)u-aq (?)				sangwa	sangwx	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \
sangyagh-	cz3mz4-	hard to move or pull (be ~)		sangyaghtuq \'91it doesn't slide easily\'92 / qamiyem suqii suvinalghiit sangyaghtut qenaaghmi qamuqaaluteng \'91rough sled runners are difficult to pull over sand\'92; peanut-butter-et sangyapigtut tuufnaqegkaaluteng ilangunateng qiighnaaqutmeng \'91peanut butter is hard to swallow without something to facilitate its sliding down (the throat)[such as jelly]\'92	slow at learning (be ~)												to be hard to move or pull; to be slow at learning		PE caya3-				sangyagh-	sangyagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
sangyite-	cz3qbns-	slide (not ~ easily)		sangyituq \'91it isn't sliding easily, it became slow\'92 / sangyitestaa \'91it made it slow\'92	slow down due to rough ground or other adverse conditions												to not slide easily; to slow down due to rough ground or other adverse conditions		< sangyagh-?-				sangyite-	sangyite-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1253 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sani	czyb	side are		saningani \'91at its side\'92; sanitmun \'91sideways\'92 or \'91to the side\'92													side area		PE cani-				sani	sani	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \
sanigh-	czyb4-	sideways		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  sanightuq \'91he turned sideways\'92; sanightaa \'91he put it sideways (with respect to something else)\'92; sanighngaaq \'91it is sideways\'92													sideways		PE canni3- (under PE cani-)				sanigh-	sanigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
sanighhuwaagh-	czyb5e164-	roll about		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to roll about	hfcrfnsdfnmcz	< canigh-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 2\nosupersub -		CK Rub 475		sanighhuwagh-	sanighhuwxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1091 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
Sanighmelngughmii(t)	Czyb4vsk3e4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)		= Sanighmelnguut													a particular clan		< sani-mete\super 2\nosupersub -nguq-mii			xxxt	Sanighmelngughmi(t)	Sanighmelngughmx(t)	\uc0\u1057 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Sanighmelnguut	Czyb4vsk38n	clan (a particular ~)		= Sanighmelngughmii(t)													a particular clan		< sani-mete\super 2\nosupersub -
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Sanighmelngut	Sanighmelngxt	\uc0\u1057 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1263 \u1090 \
sanightaaq	czyb5n62	parka (woman's fancy gutskin ~ with dangling decorations sewn on in horizontal rows from the hood down to the hem)		
\f2\i the dangling decorations are auklet crests or the ornament-like appendages that hang from the sides of the mouth of an auklet													
\f0\i0 woman's fancy gutskin parka with dangling decorations sewn on in horizontal rows from the hood down to the hem		< sanigh-?-				sanightaq	sanightxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
sanighyaq	czyb4mz2	barrier			crosspiece	interruption to one's thoughts								bar			barrier; crosspiece; obstruction; interruption to one's thoughts; mental obstruction; bar such as one put across a door to prevent entry; bar across  back of sled						sanighyaq	sanighyaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
sanighyigh-	czyb47b4-	bar entry		sanighyighaa \'91he put a bar across it\'92 or \'91he interrupted her thoughts\'92; sanighyightuq \'91his thoughts have been interrupted\'92	interrupt one\'92s thoughts												to bar entry; to interrupt one\'92s thoughts		< sanighyaq-ligh-				sanighyigh-	sanighyigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u1251 \u1080 \u1271 -\
saniite-	czy7ns-	impede activity making it difficult or impossible		saniituq \'91it keeps one from doing things\'92 / Ayvigteq taamna nunakegsaghngaan, uksumi 
\f2\i saniitutanganeng
\f0\i0 , umegneghpaalluutanganeng, savigitutanganeng avelghaghaat anuqetuqaq. Ayvigteq 
\f2\i saniilnguq
\f0\i0  piyaaniilnguq. \'91Even though Ayvigteq had solid ground, in the winter, because of the fact that 
\f2\i it wasn\'92t conducive to activity
\f0\i0 , because of the snowstorms, because there wasn\'92t opportunity to do things, they\'92d miss the chance (to hunt), it being very windy. Ayvigteq would 
\f2\i make activity impossible
\f0\i0 , it wasn\'92t not good for hunting on foot.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:64)	conducive (not be ~ to acting)												to impede activity making it difficult or impossible; to not be conducive to acting		< sa-naq-(ng)ite-				sanite-	sanxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saniligh-	czybkb4-	build addition onto side of building			add onto side of building												to build addition or add onto side of building		< saniligh-				saniligh-	saniligh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
sanineq	czybys2	ice-free edge when ice has broken away or where refrozen slush ice meets water		
\f2\i see item 65 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004													ice-free edge when ice has broken away or where refrozen slush ice meets water		< sani-neq\super 2				\nosupersub sanineq	sanineq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
saningughtaq	czyb3e5nf2	quiver for arrows															quiver for arrows		PY cani&u3taq (under PE cani-)				saningughtaq	saningughtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
saniqaq	czyb2f2	side (one\'92s ~)		pusim yugtaanghem iqaghqumaa ellmi qatelghii saniqani \'91the male cat got it\'92s white side dirty\'92													one\'92s side		< sani-qaq		CK Rub 474		saniqaq	saniqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
saniqin	czyb2by	beam (one of two) of winter house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 one of two beams that lies on the side pillars of a winter house frame		< sani-?-(u)n		CK Rub 475		saniqin	saniqin	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \
saniquun	czyb28y	centerboard for boat		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sanipuun													centerboard for boat		PE canniqun (und PE cani-)				saniqun	saniqxn	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1263 \u1085 \
sanitmiighte-	czybnv]75ns-	go sideways or to the side			sideways or to the side (go ~)												to go sideways or to the side		< sani-tmiighte-				sanitmighte-	sanitmxghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sanivlegagh-	czybdksuf4-	turn or skid sideways or to the side (suddenly ~ when moving)		qamiskek qamughakek sanivlegaghlutek uuvghumalghiik \'91the sled he was pulling suddenly turned sideways and tipped over\'92													to suddenly turn or skid sideways or to the side when moving		< sani-?-		CK A & W 104		sanivlegagh-	sanivlegagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sanqun	czy2ey	equipment		sanqutet \'91a set of hunting equipment\'92	tool	device								weapon			equipment; tool; device; weapon; useful item		PY-S canqun				sanqun	sanqun	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
sanqutraaq	czy2eni62	tool, makeshift			device, crude												makeshift tool; crude device		< sanqun-raaq				sanqutraq	sanqutrxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1096 \u257 \u1179 \
Santi	Czynb	Sunday															Sunday		from English \'91Sunday\'92	SLI			Santi	Santi	\uc0\u1057 \u1103 \u1085 \u1090 \u1080 \
santilleq	czynbk]s2	week		
\f2\i Santilleq
\f0\i0  ataasiq atughluku maligsaaghtet tawanllaataqat mangteghami, \'85. \'91One 
\f2\i week
\f0\i0  later the disciples were gathered in the house, \'85.\'92 (John 20.26)													week		< Santi-lleq				santilleq	santilleq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1090 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
santiyagh-	czynbz4-	go to Sunday church service															to go to Sunday church service		< Santi-yagh-				santiyagh-	santiyagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1085 \u1090 \u1080 \u1103 \u1271 -\
sapaaslug-	czg6ck]/u-	enslave		yaywali sapaasluguluni anglikaamalghii \'91the orphan had been raised as a slave and had been mistreated\'92	mistreat												to enslave; to mistreat						sapaslug-	sapxslug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
sapaasluk	czg6ck]/r	lowly person			menial	underling											lowly person; menial; underling		< sa-?		VK		sapasluk	sapxsluk	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u257 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
sapayu-	czgf/-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0  > sapayughhiite--; sapayungigh-																			sapayu-	sapayu-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1072 \u1102 -\
sapayughhiite-	czgf/57ns-	alert (be ~)			okay (be ~ (of a person))												to be alert; to be okay (of a person)		< sapayu-ghhaq-(ng)ite-		VK		sapayughhite-	sapayughhxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1072 \u1102 \u1203 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sapayungigh-	czgf/3b4-	recover from illness		ifkaghluni tuqufkaqaq tagtalmi sapayungightuq \'91he fell and knocked himself out, but he regained consciousness\'92	regain consiousness	perk up											to recover from illness; to regain consciousness; to perk up		< sapayu-(ng)igh-		CK A & W 104		sapayungigh-	sapayungigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1072 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
sape-	czgs-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > saape-, sapughagh, saaputaq; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  safk-															PE cap0-				sape-	sape-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 -\
sapeghhnagh-	czgs5y]f4-	cold (weather is ~)		sapeghhnaghtuq \'91it is very cold\'92 / sapeghhnaghsimaa \'91it has become very cold\'92													for weather to be very cold		PE cap03na3-				sapeghhnagh-	sapeghhnagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sapeghhnaq	czgs5y]f2	cold (very ~ weather)		
\f2\i Sapeghhnami
\f0\i0  whaten kaneghllakayuguut aagram qaayngi, nateghmi. \'91In 
\f2\i very cold weather
\f0\i0  there\'92d be lots of frost on the \'93aagra\'94 (the inner warmer living enclosure) and in the entranceway.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:106)													very cold weather						sapeghhnaq	sapeghhnaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1203 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \
sapegi-	czgsub-	lose game animal by its escaping		maklagtaghteng tugungwaaghluku sapegimaat \'91they took their bearded seal alright, but they lost it\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  saapkute-													to lose game animal by its escaping				CK A & W 104		sapegi-	sapegi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 -\
Sapeni	Czgsyb	Japanese		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 Japanese		from English \'91Japanee\'92 (non-standard variant of \'91Japanese\'92, maybe through Hawai-ian pidgeon)	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (V&E76)		
\f0\i0 Sapeni	Sapeni	\uc0\u1057 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \
sapiglleghhiistun	czgb[k]s57cney	purposelessly		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  mekelghiighhaam sapiglleghhiistun siingaa naghaalgutni \'91the little boy pushed his playmate for no reason at all\'92	unexpectedly												for no reason at all; purposelessly; unexpectedly		< sa-pigte-lleq-ghhaq-
\f2\i equalis		
\f0\i0 third gloss from VK		sapiglleghhistun	sapiglleghhxstun	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1080 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
sapiiqe-	czg72s-	cold (negatively experience extreme ~)		maqiilnguut sapiiqnaqii sapeghhnami \'91those who don\'92t dress warm will be extremely cold outside\'92	overcome (be ~ by extreme cold)												to negatively experience extreme cold; to be overcome by extreme cold				CK A & W 105		sapiqe-	sapxqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1251 \u1179 \u1099 -\
sapughagh-	czge464-	drive (a herd of reindeer) to a new place		uksaghyagu quyngighqwaaghtet sapughaamiit quyngit meghem tunganganun \'91when it became fall time, the reindeer herders drove the reindeer herd towards the ocean\'92; yugem sapughaghluku qikmiq nuyaalghii riigtenganun iteghtestaa \'91the man chased and guided the timid dog into its den\'92	drive animal(s) in the desired direction by blocking other paths	cover (it/them) repeatedly or continuously											to drive (a herd of reindeer) to a new place; to drive animal(s) in the desired direction by blocking other paths; to cover (it, them) repeatedly or continuously		< sape-ugh-?-		CK Rub 476		sapughagh-2	sapughagh-2	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 -\
saputaq	czgenf2	cover		= saaputaq	lid	curtain								shade			cover; lid; curtain; shade		< sape-(u)taq				saputaq	saputaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
saqaaghhiite-	cz2657ns-	visible (be clearly ~)		naayghat paamkut saqaaghhiitut \'91the Chukotkan mountains are clearly visible\'92													to be clearly visible				CK A & W 105		saqaghhite-	saqxghhxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u257 \u1203 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saqaaghiighute-	cf26474ens-	vision improve (have one\'92s ~)		iyegaasighyalghiimi pinilghiigneng esghallgha saqaaghhiighutuq \'91when he got a good pair of glasses, his vision became very clear\'92													to have one\'92s vision improve						saqaghighute-	saqxghxghute-	\uc0\u1089 \u1072 \u1179 \u257 \u1271 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saqaarae	cz26hfs	sugar, granulated															granulated sugar		from Russian cf[fh (sakhar) \'91sugar\'92, via Chukchi caqar, pl. caqart0 \'91sugar\'92 	14			saqarae	saqxrae	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u257 \u1088 \u1072 \u1099 \
saqe-	cz2s-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > saqeghte-, saqeme-, saaqghaghte-, saqrugaghte-															PY caq0-\super 2				\nosupersub saqe-	saqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 -\
saqeghqe-, saqighqe-	cz2s52s-. cz2b52s-	break to bits		saqeghqaa \'91he broke it to pieces\'92 / < saqeghte-ghqe\super 3\nosupersub -	chip off in bits												to break to bits; to chip off in bits						saqeghqe-, saqighqe-	saqeghqe-, saqighqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -, \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
saqeghqelleq, saqighqelleq	cz2s52sk]s2. cz2b52sk]s2	fragment			chip	scrap											fragment; chip; scrap		< saqeghqe-lleq				saqeghqelleq, saqighqelleq	saqeghqelleq, saqighqelleq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 , \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
saqeghte-, saqighte-	cz2s5ns-. cz2b5ns-	chip off a piece															to chip off a piece		< saqe-?-				saqeghte-, saqighte-	saqeghte-, saqighte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -, \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saqeme-	cz2svs-	crumble to pieces		saqemuq \'91it crumbled to pieces\'92 / saqemtaa \'91he crumbled it to pieces\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 sagheve-													to crumble to pieces		< saqe-?-				saqeme-	saqeme-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 -\
saqfigh-	cz2ab4-	toes turned out		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  saqfightuq \'91he positioned his feet with the toes turned out\'92; saqfighngaaq \'91he has his toes turned out\'92; nekevghaaq saqfighmi \'91he is standing with his toes turned out\'92													toes turned out		PE caqvi3- or caqvi!-				saqfigh-	saqfigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1092 \u1080 \u1271 -\
saqfitu-	cz2abne-	splayfooted (be ~)		saqfituuq \'91he is splayfooted\'92 /													to be splayfooted		< saqfigh-tu-				saqfitu-	saqfitu-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1092 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 -\
saqfituqaq	cz2abne2f2	splayfooted person															splayfooted person		< saqfitu-qaq				saqfituqaq	saqfituqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1092 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
saqighaghte-	cz2b4f5ns-	chip or get chipped, accidentally or suddenly		= saaqghaaghte-													to accidentally or suddenly chip		< saqe-?-aghte-				saqighaghte-	saqighaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saqipeg-	cz2bgsu-	sweep		neghuunneghmeng taaqluteng aghnuam qayuutaq saqipgaa \'91when they got done eating the woman scraped the wooden platter\'92	rake	scrape							translate first Russ. gloss, and check on 2nd				to sweep; to rake; to scrape	cujnznm herjq c gjdth[yjcnb\\ cuht,fnm			CK V & E 185; VK		saqipeg-	saqipeg-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 -\
saqlak	cz2k]zr	edible root of rosewort (roseroot)		
\f2\i found in the mountains; tastes like radish	
\f0\i0 rosewort (roseroot) root	
\f2\i Rhodiola atropurpurea
\f0\i0  (edible root)											edible root of rosewort (roseroot); 
\f2\i (Rhodiola atropurpurea)		
\f0\i0 PE caqla!				saqlak	saqlak	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
saqralqaq	cz2ifk]2f2	ice which, although still solid enough for walking, is such that footprints left on it fill with water		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  saqe-
\f2\i ; see item 66 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice with water-saturated surface, hard to walk, sled or work on												ice which, although still solid enough for walking, is such that footprints left on it fill with water; sea ice with water-saturated surface, hard to walk, sled or work on						saqralqaq	saqralqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
saqrugaghte-	cz2ieuf5ns-	chip (of glass or the like)		saqrugaghtuq \'91it got chipped\'92; saqrugaghtaa \'91he chipped it\'92 /													to chip (of glass or the like)		< saqe-?-aghte-				saqrugaghte-	saqrugaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1096 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saqrugneq	cz2ieuys2	chip (of glass or the like)		saqrugaghtuq \'91it got chipped\'92; saqrugaghtaa \'91he chipped it\'92 /													chip (of glass or the like)		< saqe-?-neq\super 2				\nosupersub saqrugneq	saqrugneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1096 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
saqrugta	cz2ie[nf	nice (how ~!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle; 
\f0\i0 saqrugta una \'91good for you!\'92	congratulations!												how nice!; congratulations!		< sa-?		CK A & W 105		saqrugta	saqrugta	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1096 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \
saqrugtatuq	cz2ie[nfne2	oh dear!		
\f2\i exclamatory particle; 
\f0\i0 Mekelghiiq iitghumalghii amik naafqevzighluku. Nanevgaam pimakanga, "Iik 
\f2\i saqrugtatuq
\f0\i0  taana!" \'91The boy went in almost breaking the door in the proscess. The old man said, \'93
\f2\i Gee whillikers,
\f0\i0  that boy!\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 68)													oh dear!		< saqrugta=tuq				saqrugtatuq	saqrugtatuq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1096 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \
saqugmun	cz2euvey	diagonally		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 diagonally		< saquk-terminalis				saqugmun	saqugmun	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
saqugneq	cz2euys2	triangle		= saqugtelleq	triangular shaped piece trimmed off edge of skin or the like												triangle; triangular shaped piece trimmed off edge of skin or the like		 < saquk-neq\super 2				\nosupersub saqugneq	saqugneq,	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
saqugtelleq	cz2e[nsk]s2	triangle		= saqugneq	triangular shaped piece trimmed off edge of skin or the like												triangle; triangular shaped piece trimmed off edge of skin or the like		 < saquk-?-lleq				saqugtelleq	saqugtelleq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
saquk	cz2er	edge of skin or meat which is often cut off and discarded															edge of skin or meat which is often cut off and discarded		PY-S caqu-\super 2				\nosupersub saquk	saquk	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \
saqumig-	cz2evbu-	hold in the crook of the arm with the arm held out and up		saqumigtuq \'91she is holding something in the crook of her arm\'92; saqumigaa \'91she is holding it in the crook of her arm\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  yaquq	hug	embrace							check Russ def in V & E , it\'92s good				to hold in the crook of the arm with the arm held out and up; to hug; to embrace				CK V & E 185, Rub 472 on 2nd gloss		saqumig-	saqumig-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
saqumiite-	cz2ev7ns-	give one something of a size that could be carried in the crook of the arm		
\f2\i formerly a form of charity													
\f0\i0 to give one something of a size that could be carried in the crook of the arm		< saqumig-?-				saqumite-	saqumxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
saquste-	cz2ecns-	glide to the side (of a bird)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  yaquq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  saaqw													to glide to the side (of a bird)						saquste-	saquste-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sari	czhb	dog, non-native type, especially one with droopy ears															non-native type dog, especially one with droopy ears		from English \'91setter\'92 (as Yupik ari \'91otter\'92 is from English \'91otter\'92, and paawra \'91powder\'92 from English \'91powder\'92)	SLI			sari	sari	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1088 \u1080 \
sariigh-	czh74-	hold competitive event			entertainment (have ~)	celebrate											to hold competive event; to have entertainment; to celebrate				CK A & W 105 CK 		sarigh-	sarxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1088 \u1251 \u1271 -\
sariiq	czh72	competition		sariiq kiyang tamaana atughtalwaaqelghii \'91most entertainment events are followed by Eskimo singing\'92; sariighllagmi tawani yugiqengegkaaguq \'91at the competitions, he beat everyone\'92	entertainment												competion; entertainment				CK A & W 105 CK 		sariq	sarxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1088 \u1251 \u1179 \
sarma-	czhvf-	brag		sarmaaq \'91he bragged\'92 / sarmatkaa panini pillguniluku \'91he bragged about his daughter saying that she was able to do things well\'92													to brag						sarma-	sarma-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1088 \u1084 \u1072 -\
sasii-	czc7-	practice (be a ~ (something one does habitually or from time to time))			device (be a ~)												to be a practice (something one does habitually or from time to time); to be a device		< sasiq-(ng)u-				sasi-	sasx-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1089 \u1251 -\
sasiq	czcb2	habit		sasii anengaghpek mingilasaqunaki \'91don\'92t scatter your brother\'92s tools about\'92	device	practice (habit)								tool			habit; device; practice; tool	ghbdsxrf	< sa-(u)siq		CK Rub 477		sasiq	sasiq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
sasiqumtaaq	czcb2evn62	custom		Apeghiighyami kenghhwak kumaghllukek, 
\f2\i sasiqumtaaghat 
\f0\i0 ayumiq kenghhwighluteng neqa kenghhwam uvitanganun llilaghtughllagaqluku. \'91When he lit a fire; it was their age-old 
\f2\i custom
\f0\i0  to build a ceremonial fire and place food around it.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:256)	predictable event												predictable even; custom; customary practice		< sa-?-qumtaaq				sasiqumtaq	sasiqumtxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
sasluggaq	czck]?[f2	small amount		mangtak sasluggaq tagivaghaa \'91she game me just a little piece of muktuk\'92; sasluggaghmeng eslallugughtaa \'91it rained only a little\'92	little bit												small amount; little bit		< sa-lluk-ggaq		VK		sasluggaq	sasluggaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1070 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
sasta	czcnf	one who is in charge or has a specialty		Kusukaq taana estuwaaftuq, taana naliq ighnegha Angunguftuq ama 
\f2\i sastenguuq
\f0\i0 . \'91That Kusukaq was a store manager, and one of his sons, it was Angu, also was 
\f2\i someone who had a position of responsibility
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:212)													one who is in charge or has a specialty		< sa-(s)ta		VK		sasta	sasta	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
saste-	czcns-	make one act or feel a certain way (generally, with a negative implication)		sasluku \'91making him feel uncomfortable\'92													to make one act or feel a certain way (generally, with a negative implication)		< sa-(te)ste-		VK		saste-	saste-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sastegheslak	czcns4sck]zr	right whale, northern			whale (northern right ~)	
\f2\i Eubalaena glacialis											
\f0\i0 northern right whale 
\f2\i (Eubalaena glacialis)						
\f0\i0 sastegheslak	sastegheslak	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
sata
\f3\b \super e1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub cznfs\'a1	inner (hairless) side of a pelt		saatnga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  satanga \'91its hairless side\'92; amim saatngan amiqerregaa keligluku taaqluku enraq mumiglluku melqulganun melqiighaa \'91scraping the dried membrane off the inside he turned it over when finished and removed the fur from the other side\'92; saatnguuq \'91it is the inside [of the pelt]\'92; Kiigmi enraq temkaluget aghvigluki, 
\f2\i satangi
\f0\i0  kavighlluki piiqiit kamengllaghaqiit. \'91In the summertime they would wash the old sealskin pants, color 
\f2\i their skin side 
\f0\i0 red and make them into boots.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:114)													inner (hairless) side of a pelt					> sategte-, saatghwaaq, saatnguraaq	satae1	satae1	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub sata\super e2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub cznfs\'99	device		
\f2\i from the "empty base",
\f0\i0  sa-, 
\f2\i which is "stress-repelling" (see 
\f0\i0 Jacobson  1984b) 
\f2\i so that the 
\f0\i0 a
\f2\i  does not lengthen during suffixation: 
\f0\i0 satnguuq \'91it is a device\'92, \'91it is the cause of something\'92	cause												device; cause		< sa-(u)n				satae2	satae2	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \super 2\

\f1\b \nosupersub sata\super e3	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub cznfs\'a3	jellyfish		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 jellyfish						satae3	satae3	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \super 3\
\nosupersub sategte-	czns[ns-	clean the hairless side of an animal pelt		sategtaa \'91he cleaned it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 sallegte-, sata\super e1	\nosupersub clean the inside of a skin tent	eat fish by stripping the meat off the skin								clean summer-type hair-in sealskin boots			to clean the hairless side of an animal pelt; to clean the inside of a skin tent; to eat fish by stripping the meat off the skin; to clean summer-type hair-in sealskin boots						sategte-	sategte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
satelgaq	cznskuf2	sandhill crane		
\f2\i Satelgaq
\f0\i0 , quuk, yungaghaqulluni kiigem qawaaga, pennam qawaaga katelghaatuq \'85. \'91The
\f2\i  crane 
\f0\i0 and the swan, together with the  jaeger, the summer bird and the cliff bird, have all arrived, \'85.\'92   (SIKU. ESL. ESGHA. 106)	crane, sandhill	
\f2\i Grus canadensis											
\f0\i0 sandhill crane (Grus canadensis)		PE tat0l!a3				satelgaq	satelgaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
sateme-	cznsvs-	come loose from what it is fastened to (of a rope)		tapghapiget aghineghmeggni satemyugumaat \'91leather skin ropes are easy to loosen when they become wet\'92													to comes loose from what it is fastened to (of a rope)				CK A & W 106		sateme-	sateme-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 -\
satun	czney	somehow		
\f2\i adverbial particle; 
\f0\i0 unangkii kaleveghllaget satun naqam ilangani pugleghaqluteng \'91the seals he catches sink most of the time but somehow some of them surface sometimes\'92	sometimes												somehow; sometimes		< sa-
\f2\i equalis		
\f0\i0 VK		satun	satun	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
satuvak	cznedfr	grayling (arctic ~)		
\f2\i Satuvagem
\f0\i0  metengtii aangeghllalghiit. \'91The 
\f2\i grayling\'92s
\f0\i0  fins are very large.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 100)	
\f2\i Thymallus arcticus												
\f0\i0 arctic grayling
\f2\i  (Thymallus arcticus)						
\f0\i0 satuvak	satuvak	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1090 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
saveg-	czdsu-	harpoon															to harpoon						saveg-	saveg-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1099 \u1075 -\
Savegkaghhaq	Czds[rf5f2	Savukahuk Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Savukahuk Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Savegkaghhaq	Savegkaghhaq	\uc0\u1057 \u1103 \u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
savegsite-	czds[cbns-	aim harpoon															to aim harpoon		< savek-?-				savegsite-	savegsite-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
savek	czdsr	harpoon (head unit of whaling ~)		saavget \'91entire set consisting of harpoon, head, rope, and floats\'92													head unit of whaling harpoon		PE cav0k				savek	savek	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1099 \u1082 \
savigaq	czdbuf2	sealskin (shaved skin of bearded seal used for making rope)		savigameng uyiingllaamalghii \'91he made a rope out of shaved bearded seal skin\'92													shaved skin of bearded seal used for making rope		< savig-aq		CK A & W 106		savigaq	savigaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
savigh-	czdb4-	whitecaps are on ocean and current is strong		esnevaqestiighpenang savighlleqaaten \'91don't get too near to the waves as they will sweep you away\'92													for there to be whitecaps on the ocean and a strong current						savigh-	savigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 -\
savighhe-	czdb5s-	whittle		savighhuq \'91he is carving\'92; savighhaa \'91he is carving it\'92 / savighhwaaghhu llivelgham esnenga sukinniighutesqelluku \'91use a knife to make the edge of the shelf smooth so that no one gets a splinter\'92	carve												to whittle; to carve; to make red-hot		PE cavi3u3- (under PE cavi!)				savighhe-	savighhe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1203 \u1099 -\
savigkaq	czdb[rf2	shale			slate												shale; slate		< savik\super 1\nosupersub -kaq		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 142		savigkaq	savigkaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
savigpak	czdb[gfr	sword		Whangkuta nunavut atighaqaat Soyuzengat Sov\'e6tskit Sotsialistich\'e6skit R\'e6spublikangita. K\'e6rbametuq 
\f2\i savigpak
\f0\i0  enkaam repa. \'91They call our land the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. On the insignia (k\'e6rba) is a 
\f2\i sickle
\f0\i0  and a hammer.\'92 (YUP. ULUNG. 2:180); 
\f2\i Savigpagen
\f0\i0  kanaghtigu qantanun, qayughllak qamaglluteng 
\f2\i savigpagmeng
\f0\i0  atuqilghiit 
\f2\i savigpagkun
\f0\i0  tuqusaghqaagut. \'91Put your 
\f2\i sword
\f0\i0  back in the scabbard, because all who live by the 
\f2\i sword
\f0\i0  shall die by the 
\f2\i sword
\f0\i0 .\'92 (Matthew 26.52)	knife, large												sword; large knife		< savik\super 1\nosupersub -ghpak		CK Rub 469 CK		savigpak	savigpak	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
savigsi-	czdb[cb-	ready (get a knife ~ for use)		neghsaq aftanaluku savigsitaa \'91he got his knife ready to butcher the seal\'92													to get a knife ready for use		< savik\super 1\nosupersub -?-		VK		savigsi-	savigsi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 -\
savigsigh-	czdb[cb4-	sharpen			get a knife ready												to sharpen; to get knife ready	njxbn yj;	< savik\super 1\nosupersub -sigh-		CK V & E 84; Rub 469		savigsigh-	savigsigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
savigtaagh-	czdb[n64-	point knife at something or someone preparatory to attacking with it															to point knife at something or someone preparatory to attacking with it		< savik\super 1\nosupersub -?-		CK		savigtagh-	savigtxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
savigtaq	czdb[nf2	blade															blade		< savik\super 1\nosupersub -taq\super 1				\nosupersub savigtaq	savigtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
savigtigh-	czdb[nb4-	direct a knife preparatory to attacking with it															to direct a knife preparatory to attacking with it				CK Rub 469 CK 		savigtigh-	savigtigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 -\
saviigaq	czd7uf2	rope made from sheared bearded seal skin 															rope made from sheared bearded seal skin				VK		savigaq	savxgaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1251 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
saviigh-	czd74	hot (make red ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 forge metal												to forge (metal); to make red hot		< savik\super 1\nosupersub -?-		CK Rub 469		savigh-	savxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 \
saviighusiq	czd74ecb2	forge for working on metal		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 forge for working on metal	ujhy	< saviigh-(u)siq		CK Rub 469		savighusiq	savxghusiq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
Savik	Czdbr	site in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka				Men. 1972, 1975		savik	savik	\uc0\u1057 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \

\f1\b savik\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub czdbr\super \'a1	\nosupersub knife for cutting (not semi-lunar type)															knife for cutting (not semi-lunar type)		PE cavi!				savik1	savik1	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 1\

\f1\b savik\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub czdbr\super \'99	\nosupersub place to do something		savigituq \'91he didn\'92t have a chance to act\'92	time to do something	opportunity to do something											place, time or opportunity to do something		< sa-vik				savik2	savik2	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 2\
savikenghaaq	czdbrsy462	tin		Kiigmi maaken 
\f2\i savikenghaaghmeng
\f0\i0  angyaqluteng \'85. \'91In the summer they use 
\f2\i aluminum
\f0\i0  boats \'85.\'92 (MRS. DELLA W. 12)	metal	aluminum											tin; metal; aluminum		< savik\super 1\nosupersub -?-				savikenghaq	savikenghxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \
savilquq	czdbk]2e2	knive, small curved															small curved knife		< savik\super 1\nosupersub -?-				savilquq	savilquq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
savinaq	czdbyf2	gunwale (tip of ~ protruding at end of skin boat)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  savik													tip of gunwale protruding at end of skin boat				CK A &  W 106; Rub 469		savinaq	savinaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
savineq	czdbys2	plain (flat land)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 valley, broad and flat												plain; valley	hfdybyf. ljkbyf			CK V & E 43		savineq	savineq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
saviq	czdb2	whitecap															whitecap						saviq	saviq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1179 \
saviwaaq	czdb162	knife made of walrus ivory and baleen															knife made of walrus ivory and baleen		< savik\super 1\nosupersub -(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK Rub 469; VK		saviwaq	saviwxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b saya\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub czz\super s	\nosupersub front of body, house, mountains, etc.		saaynga \'91its front\'92, \'91his front\'92; Aghnaq sumeghtaghaghtuq, \'93Ugika taameng neqengyiighullii, aghnameng naalkusimalghii pennam 
\f2\i saayngani
\f0\i0  whaa.\'94 \'91The woman thought, \'93No wonder my husband can\'92t provide food any more; he has found a woman in the 
\f2\i front
\f0\i0  (or side) of the cliff.\'94\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:264)	edge of sealskin	walrus skin put over door of the traditional dome-shaped house											front of body, house or mountains; walrus skin put over door of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.); edge of sealskin		PE ca90-		gloss 4: CK Rub 472; see SLI Cur. Man. 107		sayae	sayae	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1103 \u1099 \
sayaghtaq	czz5nf2	hoop of drum		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 drum hoop												hoop of drum	j,hex ,e,yf			CK V & E 100		sayaghtaq	sayaghtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sayan	czzy	for some reason		Maaten agavek 
\f2\i sayan
\f0\i0  isekiyugesqelluku aghnaq yugem, atalughat tuguluki ggatmeghruganun lliyaghii. \'91Then the man wanted the woman to feel cold 
\f2\i for some reason
\f0\i0  and so he took the cubes of blubber and put them down her back.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 123)													for some reason		< sa-
\f2\i consequential				
\f0\i0 sayan	sayan	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1103 \u1085 \
sayaneq	czzys2	strong one		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)	
\f0\i0 sturdy one												strong one; sturdy one	cbkmysq. dsyjckbdsq	PE caya(!)		CK V & E 130; Rub 479		sayaneq	sayaneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1103 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
sayekaghetaq	czqsrf4snf2	violin		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E); used in the dual,
\f0\i0  sayekaghetak, 
\f2\i for one violin													
\f0\i0 violin	crhbgrf	< sayug-?		CK V & E 100; Rub 472		sayekaghetaq	sayekaghetaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1253 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sayengqughruk	czqs32e4her	rib cage		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 rib cage	uhelyfz rktnrf	< caya\super 0\nosupersub -?		CK Rub 472		sayengqughruk	sayengqughruk	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
sayghun	czq4ey	hunting gear		
\f2\i generally used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 sayghutet; sayghuteteng puyguluki kesimalghiit \'91they forgot to bring their hunting gear when they went out to see\'92; sayghutangilnguq \'91one without hunting gear\'92													hunting gear				CK A & W 106		sayghun	sayghun	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1253 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
sayghutaq	czq4enf2	hunting implements (set of ~)															set of hunting implements				VK		sayghutaq	sayghutaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1253 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sayik	czqbr	lung power															lung power						sayik	sayik	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1253 \u1080 \u1082 \
sayug-	cz/u-	pull		sayugtuq \'91he pulled himself to something or up onto something\'92; sayugaa \'91he pulled it\'92 / sayugiiq \'91he pulled something\'92; Angyaghput 
\f2\i sayugaghput
\f0\i0  sikum qaaynganun. \'91We 
\f2\i pulled
\f0\i0  our boat on top of the ice.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 150); Eng, estu, 
\f2\i sayugnaanghitamken
\f0\i0  meghmun aatqaghtekuvek! \'91Go ahead and slide; I won\'92t 
\f2\i pull
\f0\i0  you out if you land in the water.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I 6)	tug												to pull; to tug		PE cayu!-				sayug-	sayug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u1075 -\
sayugaataq	cz/u6nf2	dresser		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  sayugaatak, 
\f2\i for one dresser or drawer	
\f0\i0 drawer (with drawers)												dresser; drawer		< sayug-?-(u)taq				sayugataq	sayugxtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u1075 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sayugh-	cz/4-	dance a set non-improvised Eskimo dance															to dance a set non-improvised Eskimo dance		PE cayu3-				sayugh-	sayugh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u1271 -\
sayughqaagh-	cz/5264-	hard, strong and durable (of skin) (become ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  atungak tukrugem sayughqaaghaquq \'91the skin is getting strong by getting hard\'92													to become hard, strong and durable (of skin)				CK Rub 479		sayughqagh-	sayughqxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u257 \u1271 -\
sayughqusiq	cz/52ecb2	starter cord on a gasoline engine															starter cord on a gasoline engine		< sayug-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -(u)siq				sayughqusiq	sayughqusiq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
sayugpagtagh-	cz/[gf[nf4-	pull with repeated jerks			tremor (have a ~)	tick (have a ~)								twitch			to pull with repeated jerks; to have a tremor; to have a tic; to twitch		< sayug-ghpak-?-				sayugpagtagh-	sayugpagtagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sayugtaagh-	cz/[n64-	tug		mekelghiighhaam sayugtaaghaqaa waapenga angyaghwaaghem \'91the small boy is tugging on the little boat\'92s tow rope\'92													to tug		< sayug-?-		CK Rub 479		sayugtagh-	sayugtxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
sayugun	cz/uey	halyard															halyard		< sayug-(u)n				sayugun	sayugun	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
sayukaneq	cz/rfys2	gravity															gravity		< sayug-?-neq\super 1				\nosupersub sayukaneq	sayukaneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
sayuugte-	cz0[ns-	shrink from drying		sayuugtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  sayuugtaa \'91it shrank\'92 / uliighegka sayuugtaak taakuk agaghngakak maatneghmi ima akugaaghhaaneng \'91my pair of sheared boots that were left hanging for days in the heat have shrunk\'92; umyugakek sayuugteghlaguuk \'91he feels tense\'92	warp from drying	tense (feel ~)								tall column (be in a ~ (of clouds))			to shrink or warp from drying; to feel tense; to be in a tall column (of clouds)		< sayug-?- (?)				sayugte-	sayxgte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sayuulnga	cz0k3f	table, low, for tea or coffee		= saguulnga	mat placed on floor for teacups and the like	coffee table											low table or tray for tea; coffee table; mat placed on floor for teacups and the like		from Chukchi cayool!0n \'91tea table\'92, which is from Russian xfq (chay) \'91tea\'92 with a Chukchi suffix				sayulnga	sayxlnga	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u772 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \
sayuun, sayuusiq	cz0y. cz0cb2	song used for a traditional dance		
\f2\i also 
\f0\i0 sayuuta													song used for a traditional dance		< sayugh-(u)n, sayugh-(u)siq				sayun, sayusiq	sayxn, sayxsiq	\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u772 \u1085 , \u1089 \u1103 \u1102 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
sefkagh-	csarf4-	cut or tear through accidentally (as to the edge when making a hole near the edge of a skin)		sefkaqaaguq \'91it got cut through\'92 /													to accidentally cut or tear through (as to the edge when making a hole near the edge of a skin)		< seve-?-				sefkagh-	sefkagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sefkaghte-	csarf5ns-	burst accidentally (as an overstuffed meat poke)		sefkaghtekaaguq \'91it burst\'92 /													to accidentally burst (as an overstuffed meat poke)		< sefkagh-?-				sefkaghte-	sefkaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
seflugpak	csak]/[gfr	horn (as of car)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 = suflugpak	whistle (factory ~)												horn (as of a car); factory whistle	ueljr	< sufluk-ghpak		CK Rub 461		seflugpak	seflugpak	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
sefluqaghte-	csak]/2f5ns-	pierce through		= sufluqaghte-													to pierce through				CK Rub 461 CK		sefluqaghte-	sefluqaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
segefkagh-	csusarf4-	holes (make ~ in something)															to make holes in something	ghjlshzdkbdfnm					segefkagh-	segefkagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
segeghqwaakaq	csus5216rf2	dry brittle wood		unaghsiq segeghqwaakaq kagimumalghii \'91the piece of dry brittle wood broke\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  segeghte-													dry brittle wood				CK A & W 106		segeghqwakaq	segeghqwxkaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
segeghte-	csus5ns-	dry excessively and become brittle (of wood)		segeghhnayukayek qamiyegni piinequmaak \'91lest his sled became too dry and brittle, he painted it\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 segeghqwaakaq													to dry excessively and become brittle (of wood)				CK A & W 106		segeghte-	segeghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
segeghte-	csus5ns-	dry and brittle (become ~ (of wood))															to become dry and brittle (of wood)		< segeq-ghte-		VK		segeghte-	segeghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
segelaan	csusk9y	hanger for clothes (suspended rod hung in the back of the traditional dome-shaped house)															hanger for clothes (suspended rod hung in the back of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.))		from Chukchi ?	x			segelan	segelxn	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \
segelmik	csuskvbr	strap, thin and light-weight, for a harpoon		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 thin and light-weight strap for a harpoon				CK Rub 458		segelmik	segelmik	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1083 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
segeni-	csusyb-	decorate with reindeer or caribou chin hairs sewn on the  surface of a hide in a garment			embroider with reindeer or caribou chin hairs												to decorate with reindeer or caribou chin hairs sewn on the  surface of a hide in a garment; to embroider with reindeer or caribou chin hairs	dsibdfnm jhyfvtyn (jktymbv djkjcjv)			CK V & E 91, VE		segeni-	segeni-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 -\
segeq	csus2	dry brittle wood			wood, dry and brittle												dry brittle wood				VK		segeq	segeq	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1179 \
segesqugh-	csusc2e4-	kneeling		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  segesqughtuq \'91he kneeled\'92; segesqughngaaq \'91he is kneeling\'92; segesqughmi yughaghtuq \'91he prayed in a kneeling position\'92													kneeling		PE ci!0qu3				segesqugh-	segesqugh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
segesqughlluk	csusc2e5k]/r	tendon of the back leg of a reindeer		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 tendon of the back leg of a reindeer		< segesquq-ghlluk		CK Rub 458		segesqughlluk	segesqughlluk	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
segesquq	csusc2e2	knee															knee		PE ci!0qu3				segesquq	segesquq	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
segesqwaaq	csusc2162	kneecap															kneecap		< segesquq-?-; PE ci!09qu(C)a3 (under ci!09qu3)				segesqwaq	segesqwxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
segeve-	csusds-	wear through or almost through		angyiita amiikek segevuk aghyum \'91their boat\'92s skin got so worn out from ageing\'92													to wear through or almost through				CK A & W 107		segeve-	segeve-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
segevneq	csusdys2	crack (as in sea ice)		
\f2\i Segevneq
\f0\i0  sikumelnguq maamaquq. \'91The 
\f2\i crack 
\f0\i0 in the is is freezing over.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 89)													crack (as in sea ice)		< segeve-neq\super 2				\nosupersub segevneq	segevneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1074 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
segge-	cs[s-	cut open		segguq \'91it split open\'92, \'91he slashed himself\'92 ; seggaa \'91he cut it open\'92 / seggelleqaa \'91he will cut it open\'92; seggaa yugem neqelghutaq awataghpak saayngakun \'91the man slashed an opening on the side of the food-storage poke\'92	slash	split open											to cut open; to slash; to split open		PE ci90!-				segge-	segge-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1093 \u1099 -\
seggute-	cs[ens-	slam into something		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  angyaq seggusimaaq esnamun \'91the boat slammed onto the shore\'92	crash into something	plunge into something											to slam crash or plunge into something	dhtpfncz			CK Rub 461		seggute-	seggute-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
segguutaq	cs[8nf2	gore (of material)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 gusset (of material)												gore or gusset (of material)		< segge-?-(u)taq		CK Rub 461		seggutaq	seggxtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1093 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
segheve-	cs4sds-	calm down		seghevuq \'91he calmed down\'92 / taghnughhaq qiyaaghwaghllagluni seghevataaghaghtuq \'91the baby finally calmed down from his crying\'92	diminish in intensity (of emotion)												to calm down; to diminish in intensity (of emotion)						segheve-	segheve-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
seghevute-	cs4sdens-	forgive		seghevutaa \'91he forgave her\'92 / 
\f2\i Seghevutaghaghtiki
\f0\i0  seghleghqelleput 
\f2\i seghevusimaluku
\f0\i0  seghletun pisteput. \'91
\f2\i Forgive
\f0\i0  us our bad deeds as we 
\f2\i forgive
\f0\i0   those who treat us badly.\'92 (Matthew 6.12)													to forgive		< segheve-(u)te-				seghevute-	seghevute-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1099 \u1074 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
seghhaagh-	cs564-	hiss (of liquid on hot surface)		seghhaaghtuq \'91it hissed\'92													to hiss (of liquid on hot surface)						seghhagh-	seghhxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1203 \u257 \u1271 -\
seghhaghute-	cs5f4ens-	sizzle		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E)													
\f0\i0 to sizzle		< seghhe-?-		CK E & V 133; Rub 461		seghhaghute-	seghhaghute-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
seghhe-	cs5s-	sweat profusely		seghhuq \'91 he sweated\'92; seghhaa \'91he is sweating\'92, \'91it is getting condensation on it\'92, \'91the dew froze\'92 / seghhelleq \'91sweat, condensation\'92	condensation (gather ~ (on it))	dew freezes (in fall time)											to sweat profusely; to gather condensation (on it); for dew to freeze (in fall time)		PE 09i3				seghhe-	seghhe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1203 \u1099 -\
seghleghhalek	cs4ks5fksr	exciting (oh how ~!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle	
\f0\i0 surprise (what a ~!)	grateful (oh, how ~ I am!)								awful (oh, how ~!)			oh how exciting!; what a surprise!; oh, how grateful I am!; oh, how awful!		< seghleq-ghhalek				seghleghhalek	seghleghhalek	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
seghleghnaq	cs4ks4yf2	bad event that causes sadness, discomfort, etc.															bad event that causes sadness, discomfort, etc.						seghleghnaq	seghleghnaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
seghleghni-	cs4ks4yb-	bad (feel ~ (for a long time) about a situation)															to feel bad (for a long time) about a situation		< seghleq-neq\super 1\nosupersub -li- (?)				seghleghni-	seghleghni-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 -\
seghleghqe-	cs4ks52s-	err		seghleghquq igaqilleghmineng \'91he made a mistake in his writin\'92g; seghleghqegkaaguq apelleghmi \'91from what's been said, he has sinned\'92; seghleghniighaqut taakut net ima panigat tuqumaaq \'91that household is in a very bad situation since their daughter has died\'92	mistake (make a ~)	sin								unfortunate situation (be in a very ~)			to err; to make a mistake; to sin; to be in a very unfortunate situation		< seghleq-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				seghleghqe-	seghleghqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
seghleghqwaaq	cs4ks52162	rubbish			trash												rubbish; trash		< seghleq-?		CK Rub 459 CK 		seghleghqwaq	seghleghqwxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
seghleghu-	cs4ks4e-	bad (be ~)															to be bad		< seghleq-(ng)u-				seghleghu-	seghleghu-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 -\
seghleghyug-	cs4ks4m/u-	bad (feel ~ (for a short time))			hurt (have ~ feelings)												to feel bad (for a short time); to have hurt feelings		< seghleq-yug-				seghleghyug-	seghleghyug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
seghleliigh-	cs4ksk74-	hard time (have a ~)		iqlengiqutkelluki ilangi seghleliighqiimalghii \'91he lied about the others and had a hard time\'92	grieve	depression (experience ~)											to have a hard time; to grieve; to experience depression		< seghleq-liigh-		CK A & W 107		seghleligh-	seghlelxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
seghleq	cs4ks2	bad thing or situation		seghleq tagivaghaa \'91he gave (me) the wrong one (or a bad one)\'92; seghleq atuqaat kiilqusiq apangat aviighutaqngan \'91they went through a bad period all summer while their grandfather had died\'92; esla seghleq usaalqusiq kiyaghtuq \'91it was bad weather all fall\'92; seghleghuuq \'91it is bad, wrong, worthless\'92	useless thing	wrong one											bad thing or situation; useless thing; wrong one		PE ci3l03-				seghleq	seghleq	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
seghleqe-	cs4ks2s-	criticize		seghleqaa \'91he dislikes it\'92 /	dislike												to criticize; to dislike		< seghleq-ke-				seghleqe-	seghleqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
seghletun	cs4ksney	badly		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  seghletun ayuquq \'91it is poor, not good\'92; seghletun kiyaghtaquq \'91he lives poorly\'92	wrongly	carelessly or stupidly								poorly			badly; wrong; carelessly or stupidly; poorly		< seghleq-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 seghletun	seghletun	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
segneq	csuys2	pot		
\f2\i may be used in the dual,
\f0\i0  sagneghek, 
\f2\i for one bowl;
\f0\i0  = sagneq, signeq	pan	dish								bowl			pot; pan; food container; dish; bowl						segneq	segneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Sekennaak	Csrsy]6r	Sekinak Lagoon and site at its southeast end on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 and Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Sekinak Lagoon and site at its southeast end on St. Lawrence Is.						Sekennak	Sekennxk	\uc0\u1057 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u257 \u1082 \
Sekennaam kenlanga	
\fs20 Csrsy]6v rsykz3f	
\fs24 Sekinak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. (site with VABM  \'93Geena\'94 at northwest end of ~ )		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site with VABM  \'93Geena\'94 at northwest end of Sekinak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		< Sekenaak-
\f2\i relative 
\f0\i0 + kenla-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxk	Sekennam kenlanga	Sekennxm kenlanga	\uc0\u1057 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1100 \u257 \u1084  \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1072 \
sekete-	csrsns-	dunk or bury one\'92s head in something		seketuq \'91it is dunking its head\'92; seketaa \'91he is dunking his (someone else's) head\'92 /	bend way over forward (people, birds)	dip into something								lower the head			to dunk or bury one's head in something; to bend way over forward (people, birds); to dip into something; to lower the head		PE cik0(t)-		gloss 3: Rub 459		sekete-	sekete-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
seketeste-	csrsnscns-	set in (of fog)		atgenra tagituk seketestaa tengegkayuget kaatut \'91the fog set in just as the plane was coming in\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 sekete-													to set in (of fog)				CK A & W 107		seketeste-	seketeste-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
semnga	csv3f	castrated reindeer											check gloss				castrated reindeer		from Chukchi c0m&0, pl. c0m&at \'91male reindeer\'92 (but Koryak meaning \'91castrated reindeer\'92)	04, 14	deR. 356		semnga	semnga	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1084 \u1187 \u1072 \

\f1\b semqatwhala\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub csv2fn[1fkf\super s	\nosupersub knife (pocket ~)		
\f2\i used in dual,
\f0\i0  semqatwhalek
\f2\i for one 
\f0\i0 \'91pocket knife\'92;  = semqatwhalik									; also sumqatwhalak in Rub 465				pocket knife		from Chukchi c0mqatwal, pl. c0mqatwalat \'91folding knife\'92	14			semqatwhalae	semqatwhalae	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1084 \u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1093 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1072 \u1099 \
semqatwhali	csv2fn[1fkb	knife (pocket ~)		
\f2\i used in dual,
\f0\i0  semqawhalik, 
\f2\i for one 
\f0\i0 \'91pocket knife\'92;  
\f2\i Semqatwhaligni
\f0\i0  imeglukek estegmiglukek atami nuluusii ivaghyaghtuumakanga. \'91Folding up his 
\f2\i pocket knife
\f0\i0  he put it in his pocket, and went to look for his father\'92s fishing pole and line.\'92 (SULUWET 68); = semqatwhala									; also sumqatwhalak in Rub 465				pocket knife		from Chukchi c0mqatwal, pl. c0mqatwalat \'91folding knife\'92	14			semqatwhali	semqatwhali	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1084 \u1179 \u1072 \u1090 \u1093 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \
senapun	csyfgey	centerboard in wooden whaleboat		= sanepuun													centerboard in wooden whaleboat		perhaps from English \'91centerboard\'92	SLI			senapun	senapun	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1085 \u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1085 \
sengelqagh-	cs3sk]2f4-	hop on one leg		sengelqaghtuq \'91he hopped\'92; sengelqaghaa \'91he hopped across or over it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 senglepeghte-													to hop on one leg		PY ci&0l0-; but cf. Chukchi c0&qayt0- \'91hop\'92 (with cognates in Koryak and Alutor, which may in fact be from Eskimo)				sengelqagh-	sengelqagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
senglepegragh-	cs3ksgsuhf4-	limp around		senglepegraghtuq \'91he\'92s limping around\'92 /													to limp around		< senglepegte-?-		VK		senglepegragh-	senglepegragh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
senglepegte-	cs3ksgs[ns-	limp		senglepegtuq \'91he limped\'92 / = singlepegte-; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sengelqagh-													to limp		PY ci&0l0-				senglepegte-	senglepegte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sengngugh-	cs3]e4-	overflow water collects on lake or river ice 															for overflow water to collect on lake or river ice 				VK		sengngugh-	sengngugh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1271 -\
sengnguq  	cs3]e2	route, open, amid sea ice			overflow water on lake or river ice												open route amid sea ice; overflow water on lake or river ice	ghj[jl. genm. jnrhsdib7cz vt;le  kmlbyfvb	PY ci&u3-		CK V & E 26, VK		sengnguq  	sengnguq  	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1179 \
seqemengeltagh-	cs2svs3sk]nf4-	exude liquid, especially blood, in bead-like form		kilillgha sivukluni aawmeng seqemengeltaghluni aagtuquq \'91at first his cut started to bleed in beads before the blood really started to flow\'92 													to exude liquid, especially blood, in bead-like form				CK A & W 108		seqemengeltagh-	seqemengeltagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
seve-	csds-	cut or tear through cloth, skin, flesh, etc., especially starting from a hole		sevuq \'91it got cut through\'92; sevaa \'91he cut through it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sefkagh-, sefkaghte-													to cut or tear through cloth, skin, flesh, etc., especially starting from a hole		PY civ0-				seve-	seve-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
sevnaawraq	csdy61hf2	tea leaves		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 \'93tea leaves\'94				SLI Cur. Res. Man.		sevnawraq	sevnxwraq	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1074 \u1085 \u257 \u1265 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
sevraquma-	csdhf2evf-	toothed (be ~ (have sharp projections)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sevri sevri \'91a \'93tri-toothed\'94 bone in a fish head that can be fatal if swallowed\'92; iqallugem sevringa \'91a fish\'92s \'93tri-toothed\'94 bone\'92													to be toothed (have sharp projections)						sevraquma-	sevraquma-	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 -\
sevri	csdhb	bone, three-toothed, in a fish head that can be fatal if swallowed		iqallugem sevringa \'91a fish\'92s \'93three-toothed\'94 bone\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sevraquma-													\'93three-toothed\'94 bone in a fish head that can be fatal if swallowed						sevri	sevri	\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1080 \
siftagh-	cbanf4-	plant one\'92s feet firmly on the floor		meghutlugek tuullukek siftaghqaak \'91he flattened the can by stepping on it\'92; Qalqalimakun elngaatall unaghsikun 
\f2\i siftaghlluki
\f0\i0  siqlugwiiqakun taaggun. \'91With an axe we\'92d 
\f2\i flatten
\f0\i0  them to put in the storage cellar.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:98); Qayaqsighvik teskanavek ketfaghluni ugugnaghaq tuusaqenni 
\f2\i siftaghqumakanga
\f0\i0 . \'91Qayaqsighvik went down there and when he stepped on the shrew he 
\f2\i crushed
\f0\i0  it.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 80)	flatten	crush											to flatten; to plant one\'92s feet firmly on the floor; to crush		PY-S civt0-		VK		siftagh-	siftagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1092 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sifteghnak	cbans4yfr	rock, large, flat															large flat rock				VK		sifteghnak	sifteghnak	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
siftugh-	cbane4-	bury deeply		siftughaa \'91it buried it\'92 / qanigughteghllagluni yugem unkusengi siftuusimakangi \'91it snowed so heavily that the man's traps got buried\'92													to bury deeply		PY-S civt0-				siftugh-	siftugh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1092 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
siftughughte-	cbane4e5ns-	kneel (be in a kneeling position (of dogs, wolves))		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to be in a kneeling position (of dogs, wolves)		PY-S civt0-				siftughughte-	siftughughte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1092 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Sigasit	Cbufcbn	site on the coast east of Gambell at Tiflighak Bay		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Tiflighak Bay (site on the coast east of Gambell at ~)												site on the coast east of Gambell at Tiflighak Bay		< ?-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Sigasit	Sigasit	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \
sighima-	cb4bvf-	hope		sighimaaq \'91he is looking forward to something\'92	faith (have ~)	look forward to something											to hope; to have faith; to look forward to something				VK		sighima-	sighima-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 -\
sighimake-	cb4bvfrs-	hope for		sighimakaqeftii lipighsaghani kaannayukata tengegkayiskan \'91she\'92s hoping that her order comes in when the plane arrives\'92; Kuusmeyaghtuqanga 
\f2\i sighimakestaghaqukut
\f0\i0  yughaghvigem mission box-ngan maqalghiimeng uligmeng. \'91With Christmas approaching, we\'92d start to 
\f2\i anticipate
\f0\i0  a warm blanket from the church\'92s mission box.\'92 (KALLAG. 42); Esghaghqi elpek iiggeten igamsiqakumiita enkaam 
\f2\i sighimakumiita
\f0\i0 . \'91Look at your hands, being thankful for them and 
\f2\i full of expectation
\f0\i0  
\f2\i toward
\f0\i0  them.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 146)													to hope for		< sighima-ke\super 2\nosupersub -		CK A & W 108		sighimake-	sighimake-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
Sighinek, Sighineq	Cb4bysr. Cb4bys2	Sireniki, village in Chukotka		
\f2\i this village originally spoke an Eskimo language very different from (Central Siberian) Yupik, but the older language, \'93Sirenikski\'94 or \'93Starosirenikski\'94 (\'93Old Sirenik\'94) is no longer spoken; at present the Eskimo speakers in this village speak only (Central Siberian) Yupik;
\f0\i0  Sighineghmii 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  Sighinegmii \'91person of Sireniki (including any present day (Yupik) resident)\'92; 
\f2\i Sighinek
\f0\i0  wata angliiquq, nekeftaqiit nutaghat aangelghiit guygut, aanguq igaghviga, aghalighviga, nalugvilguuq v\'e6r'tolyotmun. \'91
\f2\i Sireniki
\f0\i0  is growing all the time; they put up big new buildings; its school is large, and also its clinic and airport for helicopters.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 153)									
\f2\i see maps in Appendix; 				
\f0\i0 Sireniki, village in Chukotka						Sighinek, Sighineq	Sighinek, Sighineq	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1082 , \u1057 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
sighla-	cb4kz-	go fast		sighlaaq \'91he is acting with strong emotion, with intensity\'92 / sighlatkaa aleni qivghuvikluku ivenruutegneng \'91he really got angry at his companion over the loss of the outboard motor\'92; angyat aygumun sighlaaqeftut \'91the boat had been heading north fast\'92; nanevgam sighlatkaqaa iqalluk quupqaategni \'91the old man is getting plenty of fish at the ice crack\'92	get plenty	act with strong emotion								intensity (act with ~)			to act with strong emotion; to go fast; to get plenty of something; to act with intensity		PE ci3la!		CK Rub 441 CK 		sighla-	sighla-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1083 \u1103 -\
Sighnasugaq	Cb4yfc/uf2	Nome		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Nome		from Bering Strait Inupiaq Siqnazuaq				Sighnasugaq	Sighnasugaq	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
sighuneq	cb4eys2	antler		sighuneghpalluq \'91one with big antlers\'92; Quyngit qamaglluteng neghegkayuguut. Sugupagi ayakaghaqluki, sigutangi, 
\f2\i sighunghan
\f0\i0  melqwi, itegii ayakaghaqluki neghughaqiit. \'91Every part of the reindeer can be eaen. Its jowls, its ears, its 
\f2\i antler\'92s
\f0\i0  velvet, and its feet, are barbecued and eaten.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:96)													antler		PY-S ci3un0q				sighuneq	sighuneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Sighunpaget	Cb4eygfusn	clan (a particular ~)		
\f2\i at Ungaziq in Chukotka; closely related to the Siqlugmiit
\f0\i0  ; 
\f2\i singular is 
\f0\i0 Sighunpak													a particular clan				CK Rub 442 CK		Sighunpaget	Sighunpaget	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \
sighunpayaak	cb4eygf9r	fourhorn sculpin			sculpin (fourhorn ~)	
\f2\i Myoxocephalus quadricornis											
\f0\i0 fourhorn sculpin 
\f2\i (Myoxocephalus quadricornis)		
\f0\i0 < sighuneq-?-				sighunpayak	sighunpayxk	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1087 \u1072 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
sighute-	cb4ens-	buried (get ~ by action of waves and sand)		mallum nalighnegha sighusimakanga \'91part of a carcass was buried by the waves\'92	covered over (get ~ by action of waves and sand)												to get buried or covered over by action of waves and sand		PY ci3u-		CK A & W 108		sighute-	sighute-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sighyak	cb4mzr	ice fog			fog-like condition from tiny snow or ice particles suspended in the air												ice fog; fog-like condition from tiny snow or ice particles suspended in the air				SLI Cur. Man. 21		sighyak	sighyak	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
sigiin	cbu7y	ice, new, in previously open lead in ice field		
\f2\i see item 67 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	refrozen lead, good to walk on	sea ice type											new ice in previously open lead in ice field; refrozen lead, good to walk on		PE ci!i- and ci!!i(t)-				sigin	sigxn	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1251 \u1085 \
sigineq	cbubys2	chapped lip		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 chapped lip	gjnhtcrfdifzcz ue,f	PE ci!i- and ci!!i(t)-		CK Rub 440		sigineq	sigineq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
sigiqe-	cbub2s-	break glass, eggshell, ceramic, etc.		sigiquq \'91it broke\'92; sigiqaa \'91he broke it\'92 /	shatter glass, eggshell, ceramic, etc.												to break or shatter glass, eggshell, ceramic, etc.		PE ci!i- and ci!!i(t)-				sigiqe-	sigiqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
signeq	cbuys2	pot		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  
\f2\i may be used in the dual,
\f0\i0  signeghek, 
\f2\i for one bowl;
\f0\i0  = sagneq, segneq	pan	dish								bowl			pot; pan; food container; dish; bowl						signeq	signeq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
sigugneq	cbueuys2	ice on or near shore formed from slush brought to the shore by waves, piled up and possibly refreezing when the water recedes		sigugnightuq \'91piled up slush ice collect on the beach, thick ice forms on the shore\'92; sigugneghiituq \'91the ice goes from the shore\'92; Taagken Taykegergen esnamun atghaamalghii. 
\f2\i Sigugneghmun
\f0\i0  uugsimalghii. Uuglluni anglaaq ukinnaqumakanga. \'91Then Taykegergen when down to the shore. He got up on 
\f2\i the piled ice near the shore
\f0\i0 . After he got up on it he made a hole in it.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 20); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  siku; 
\f2\i see item 67 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004													ice on or near shore formed from slush brought to the shore by waves, piled up and possibly refreezing when the water recedes						sigugneq	sigugneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
sigun	cbuey	ear		
\f2\i also 
\f0\i0 siguta; sigutnga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  sigutanga \'91his ear\'92; sigutegka kumlataak \'91my ears are cold\'92; Legannguq aghnam tawavek seketfikluku 
\f2\i sigutangakun
\f0\i0  meghyaqminigu, meghyaqminigu iilqwa. Meghaa, meghaa, qamagtaa. Inglunganun qiifluku inglungallu meghaa, meghaa, meghaa 
\f2\i sigutngakun
\f0\i0  iilqwa qaamna meghaa, qamagtaa.'And the woman dipped into with it 
\f2\i through his ear 
\f0\i0 when she drank it, she drank his brain. She drank it and drank it and finished it up. She twisted it around it to the inside of it [his skull] and drank its inside, she drank it and drank it and she drank that brain in there  
\f2\i through his ear
\f0\i0  finishing it up.' (AYUM. UNGIP. II:10); sigutegken sameng imangaghsigataak? \'91have your ears had anything come into them (that is, have you gotten any news)?\'92													ear		PE ci!un				sigun	sigun	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
sigutkegsi-	cbuenrs[cb-	alert (stay ~ for news)			ears open (\'93keep one\'92s ~\'94 )												to stay alert for news; to \'93keep one\'92s ears open\'94		< sigun-?-		VK		sigutkegsi-	sigutkegsi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 -\
sigutkegsi-	cyuenrs[cb-	alert (keep ~ for important news)															to keep alert for important news		< sigun-kegte-?-		VK		sigutkegsi-	sigutkegsi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1085 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 -\
sigutkesi-	cbuenrscb-	listen for something		tengegkayuget kaannayukata sigutkegsitkaqanka \'91I am listening for the plane to come in\'92; ungipameng awen sigutkegsiiqsaghtuq \'91he often listens for news\'92													to listen for something		< sigun-?-		CK A & W 109		sigutkesi-	sigutkesi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 -\
sigutlug-	cbuenk]/u-	ear infection (have an ~)			earache (have an ~)												to have an ear infection or earache						sigutlug-	sigutlug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
sigutluk	cbuenk]/r	ear infection			infected ear												ear infection; infected ear		< sigun-lluk				sigutluk	sigutluk	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
sigutmeketaq	cbuenvsrsnf2	dried fruit (especially pear, peach or apricot)		
\f2\i so called from their resemblance to an ear	
\f0\i0 mushroom												dried fruit (especially pear, peach or apricot); mushroom		< sigun-?-				sigutmeketaq	sigutmeketaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sigutngiitaq	cbuen3]7nf2	earmuff		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  sigutngiitak, 
\f2\i for one pair of earmuffs													
\f0\i0 earmuff		< sigun-(ng)iitaq				sigutngitaq	sigutngxtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sigutqugh-	cbuen2e4-	whisper into one's ear		sigutqughtuq \'91he whispered into someone's ear\'92; sigutqughaa \'91he whispered into her ear\'92 /													to whisper into one's ear		< sigun-?-				sigutqugh-	sigutqugh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
sii	c7	drumskin		Neqmun, aqeftaghaghamun unatapsugmun saguyam 
\f2\i siinganun
\f0\i0  siighnat atuqaqiit. \'91They use walrus stomachs for containers for food and for when they pick greens and for the 
\f2\i skins
\f0\i0  of drums.\'92 (MRS. DELLA W. 52); 
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  siik, 
\f2\i for the skin ofone drum,
\f0\i0  saguyam siikek \'91the drum's skin\'92	ice, newly frozen sheet on water												drumskin; thin newly frozen sheet of ice on water		PE 0ci3				si	sx	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \
sii- 	c7-	put drumskin on a drum		saguyak siigaak \'91he put a skin on the drum\'92; naayvaq siimaa \'91the lake has gotten a sheet of ice on it\'92; siiyuwhaaghtuq \'91it is starting to freeze over\'92	ice sheet forms in water												to put drumskin on a drum; for a sheet of thin ice to form on the water						si- 	sx- 	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 -\
siifte-	c7ans-	set a net, snare or trap		siiftaa \'91he set it\'92 / siiftiiq \'91he set a net snare or trap\'92; siifutaa \'91he set a net snare or trap to catch it\'92													to set a net, snare, or trap		PY-S civt0-				sifte-	sxfte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
siiggaghaghte-	c7[f4f5ns-	degrade vision through condensation		iyegaatkek enraq siiggaghaghtaghllawaak \'91but he keeps getting his glasses foggy from his breathe\'92; iyegaatkek siiggaghaghtaak qesighneghem \'91the mist suddenly fogged up his eyeglasses\'92	condensation (degrade vision through ~)	fog up suddenly											to degrade vision through condensation; to suddenly fog up		< sii-?-		CK A & W 109, VK		siggaghaghte-	sxggaghaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1093 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
siigh-	c74-	weather clears up		siightuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  siighaa \'91it cleared up\'92 /	fog clears up	blizzard passes								smoke clears up			for weather to clear up; for fog, blizzard, or smoke to clear up, dissipate or pass		PE 0cu3it- (under PE 0cu3-)				sigh-	sxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
Siighmiik	C74v7r	Gambell (creek flowing from the southeast side of the mountain behind ~ to the south end of Troutman Lake)		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Troutman Lake (creek flowing from the southeast side of the mountain behind Gambell to the south end of ~)												creek flowing from the southeast side of the mountain behind Gambell to the south end of Troutman Lake		PE ci3mi3 \'91ice coating\'92				Sighmik	Sxghmxk	\uc0\u1057 \u1251 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 \u1082 \
siighnaq	c74yf2	walrus stomach		ayveghem siighnaa imanameng imaqeghllagpetuq \'91the walrus stomach was full of clams\'92; 
\f2\i Siighnaq
\f0\i0  aqeftaghaaq neqmeng imiimakanga. \'91She filled the 
\f2\i walrus stomach
\f0\i0  bag with food.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 69)													walrus stomach						sighnaq	sxghnaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b siighni-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub cb4yb-\'a1	prepare a walrus stomach for use as a bag															to prepare a walrus stomach for use as a bag		< siighnaq-i\super \'a3\nosupersub -		CK A & W 109		sighni-1	sxghni-1	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub siighni-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c74yb-\'99	skip a stone across the surface of the water		uyghak lliivneqegtaq miluulluku siighniiq \'91I threw a flat stone against the surface of the water and it skipped as it went\'92													to skip a stone across the surface of the water				CK A & W 109, VK		sighni-2	sxghni-2	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 -\super 2\
\nosupersub siigte-	c7[ns-	diarrhea (have ~)		siigtuq \'91he just had (an attack of) diarrhea\'92; siigtaquq \'91he is having (repeated bouts) of diarrhea\'92													to have diarrhea		PE 0t0!(ta3)- or 0ci!(a3)-				sigte-	sxgte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
siikaq	c7rf2	walrus stomach, dried, to be used as a drum-skin		siikaqa taana saguyagma siinganun simiinnaluku piiqaqa \'91I am planning on having that walrus stomach for the drum as a replacement for the drum-skin\'92													dried walrus stomach to be used as a drum-skin		< sii-kaq		CK A & W 109		sikaq	sxkaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
siikerek	c7rshsr	sound of the ground squirrel		
\f2\i imitative	
\f0\i0 squirrel (ground ~ sound)												sound of the ground squirrel						sikerek	sxkerek	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1082 \
siiknegh-	c7ry]s4-	determined (be ~)		siikneghutmineng sameng allgeghquutuq \'91due to his determination he got all sorts of things\'92; siikneghuyaquvek naamaan lliighnayaghtuten \'91if you were more persistent, you would have enough material\'92	persistent (be ~)												to be determined; to be persistent				CK A & W 109; Rub 443		siknegh-	sxknegh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 -\
siikneq	c7ry]s2	determined person		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 sikna-	persevering person												determined persevering person				VK		sikneq	sxkneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
siilu	c7k/	brass		Moses-em napaghutellghatun 
\f2\i siilumeng
\f0\i0  ulimaaqnemeghyaq kilgaani, \'85. \'91Like the serpent made of 
\f2\i bronze
\f0\i0  that Moses had erected in the wilderness, \'85.\'92 (John 3.14)	copper								can this also mean \'91copper\'92 as in Rub.? silu in Rub 445				brass; copper		from Chukchi cetlocel, pl. cetlot \'91copper\'92	14	gloss 2: Rub 445		silu	sxlu	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1083 \u1102 \
siilukaghqaq	c7k/rf52f2	copper ore															copper ore	vtlyfz helf	< siilu-kaghqaq		CK Rub 445		silukaghqaq	sxlukaghqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
siimghu	c7v4e	stick, small, used for kindling		Enkaangam yuges-tamaakut yataaghqaqut, quugkameng quugsaghtughaqluteng, 
\f2\i siimghumeng
\f0\i0  qupughaqluteng quugmeng, tagiquutaqiit mangteghameggnun. \'91Furthermore those people would get things ready, gathering firewood, splitting 
\f2\i kindling
\f0\i0 , bringing it their houses.\'92 (MRS. DELLA W. 8)	kindling	scrap of wood								wood (scrap of ~)			small stick used for kindling; kindling; scrap of wood		PE ci9am3u (under PI ci9a!-)				simghu	sxmghu	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1084 \u1271 \u1091 \
siinge-	c73s-	push		siingaa \'91he pushed it\'92 / siingiiq \'91he shoved something\'92; siingluku qiyastaa \'91he made him cry by shoving him\'92	shove												to push; to shove		PE ci&0(t)-				singe-	sxnge-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1187 \u1099 -\
siingen, siingenllu	c73sy. c73syk]/	still		
\f2\i particle; Siingenllu
\f0\i0  ivenruun allgelghii. \'91
\f2\i By this time
\f0\i0  the outboard motor had made it\'92s appearance.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:170); Iitek naangan akuqaghnaqumayaqanga. 
\f2\i Siingenllu
\f0\i0  aga kalevuq. \'91Her mother did try to grab her. 
\f2\i Nevertheless
\f0\i0  she sank.\'92 (KIILUUQ 5)	nevertheless	only								already			still; nevertheless; only; already		from Chukchi ce&er, ce&et \'91since, because\'92				singen, singenllu	sxngen, sxngenllu	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 , \u1089 \u1251 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
siinghhaq	c7y5f2	ice (newly formed layer of ~)															newly formed layer of ice		< sii-nghhaq				singhhaq	sxnghhaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1085 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
siingleghagh-	c73ks4f4-	plane wood		unaghsiq siingleghaghaa \'91he planed the piece of wood\'92; taghnughhaq qamiyngwaaghegnekun siingleghaghaa \'91she pushed the baby around on a sled\'92	push continuously												to push continuously; to plane wood		< siinge-?-				singleghagh-	sxngleghagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
siingleghaq	c73ks4f2	carpenter\'92s plane		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  siingleghak, 
\f2\i for one plane; evidentally a direct nominalization of
\f0\i0  siingleghagh-	plane (carpenter\'92s ~)												carpenter's plane						singleghaq	sxngleghaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
siinguraq	c73ehf2	ice floes floating close together in strip-like formation near the land, may extend far, dangerous to walk on		
\f2\i see item 69 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												ice floes floating close together in strip-like formation near the land, may extend far, dangerous to walk on		< siinge-?-				singuraq	sxnguraq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1187 \u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
siingutaq	c73enf2	pole for pushing fishnet from shore															pole for pushing fishnet from shore		< siinge-(u)taq		CK Rub 447		singutaq	sxngutaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
siingvallaagh-	c73dfk]64-	speak in anger or hatred		siingvallaaghpenang emta pinitun pi \'91don\'92t be talking with an angry tone again, be nice\'92													to speak in anger or hatred		< siinge-?-		CK A & W 110		singvallagh-	sxngvallxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1187 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1271 -\
siingvallagha-	c73dfk]z4f-	speak in an aggressive manner		
\f2\i Siingvallaghangigatut
\f0\i0 ; men ayghighllequq. \'91They don\'92t 
\f2\i talk in an aggressive, pushy way
\f0\i0  [and you mustn\'92t either]; your voice [being that way] will become a habit.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 42); siingvallaghameng aleghqughaa \'91he talked to her in a harsh and loud way\'92	aggressive (speak in an ~ manner)												to speak in an aggressive manner						singvallagha-	sxngvallagha-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1187 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 -\
siinqigute-	c732buens-	rinse		amiirat uqiighluki aghvigluki alla siinqigulluki agaghtaqluki \'91remove the fat from the sealskins, then wash them, rinse them, and then hang them up\'92; siinqigutkaghqameng anigumeng ughugsighaqunga uygaaghmun \'91I am melting snow for rinsing the bleached sealskin\'92													to rinse				CK A & W 110		sinqigute-	sxgqigute-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1187 \u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
siinu	c7ye	pantry			storeroom on either or both sides of the the insulated inner room of the traditional dome-shaped house												pantry; storeroom on either or both sides of the the insulated inner room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		from Chukchi ?	x			sinu	sxnu	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1085 \u1091 \
siipgaghte-	c7g[f5ns-	strip (accidentally ~ something off)		kilillghan qaltenga iigganilnguq amigkun aagulluku siipgaghtaa \'91the scap on the cut on his hand got stripped off when he scrapped it on the door\'92													to accidentally strip something off		< sipegte-aghte-		VK		sipgaghte-	sxpgaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1087 \u1093 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
siipneq	c7gy]s2	excesss		
\f2\i this word is used in forming certain of the numerals, for example:
\f0\i0  qula ataasiq siipneqluku \'91eleven\'92 (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , \'91ten with one left over\'92); qula maalghuk siipneqlukek \'91twelve\'92; qula pingayut siipneqluki \'91thirteen\'92; qula estamat siipneqluki \'91fourteen\'92; qula aghvinlek siipneqluku \'91sixteen\'92; qula maaghraghvinlek siipneqluku \'91seventeen\'92	leftover												excess; leftover		PE ci(0)n03 (under PE cip0(t)-); < siipte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub sipneq	sxpneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1087 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
siipngaan	c7g36y	abundance (in ~)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  qamughtekaghqaq quyngiq ulimaghtumakangant repall siipngaan \'91they domesticated reindeer as draft animals so much that they had an adundance\'92; siipngaan manilgukuvek tunaghhnakevnga \'91if you have enough eggs would you give me some\'92; siipngaan yaayasiiq \'91he is into mischief more than enough\'92; Akitulleghpigaat saam $60-mun kaatqaghlluteng. Qenghaghtut tamaakut entaqun $100 
\f2\i siipngaan
\f0\i0  wallu $75. \'91The highest price was in the $60 range. Blue fox [pelts] went 
\f2\i as high as
\f0\i0  $100, or $75.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:174)	enough to meet the need												in abundance; enough to meet the need		< siipngagh-?		CK Rub 447; VK		sipngan	sxpngxn	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1087 \u1187 \u257 \u1085 \
siipngagh-	c7g3]f4-	excess (be in ~ beyond \'85)		Kingulighmi sukatkaagukut. Three hours 
\f2\i siipngaqaghtekaqaghput
\f0\i0 . \'91The next time we went faster. It 
\f2\i took us a little over
\f0\i0  three hours.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:202); Tagtalngi kiyang twenty feet 
\f2\i siipngalghiit
\f0\i0 .  \'91They [the boats] were 
\f2\i a bit over
\f0\i0  twenty feet in length.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:166)													to be in excess beyond \'85		< siipte-nga-				sipngagh-	sxpngagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1087 \u1187 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
siipniyug-	c7g]y/u-	sufficient (feel that something is ~)		angyangituq siipniyugluni yugtuyata \'91he did not go boating [with them] when he realized that they had a sufficient crew [without him]\'92	superfluous (feel ~)												to feel that something is sufficient; to feel superfluous		< siipneq-li-yug-		VK		sipniyug-	sxpniyug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1087 \u1100 \u1085 \u1102 \u1075 -\
siipte-	c7gns-	excess (have an ~)		siiptuq \'91there is some left over from it\'92; siiptaa \'91he has some of it left over, he didn't use it all\'92 / siiputaa \'91he left some for her\'92	left over (have something ~)												to have something left over; to have an excess		PE cip0(t)-				sipte-	sxpte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1087 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Siiqivak	C72bdfr	Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. (projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus near west end of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus near west end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.						Siqivak	Sxqivak	\uc0\u1057 \u1251 \u1179 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
siirgusiigh-	c7huec74-	scramble eggs		ayumighhaaneng tawaten gaaqat siirgusiighmeng atelget alngunak saam manigi \'91ever since long ago, they called this method of cooking of any sort of eggs \'93srambling\'94\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sigiqe-													to scramble eggs						sirgusigh-	sxrgusxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1088 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
siirgusiiq	c7huec72	scrambled eggs			eggs, scrambled												scrambled eggs						sirgusiq	sxrgusxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1088 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
siitghusiq	c7n5ecb2	awl															awl		< sitegh-(u)siq				sitghusiq	sxtghusiq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
siivanlleq	c7dfyk]s2	elder		siivanlleghet \'91elders\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sivu													elder						sivanlleq	sxvanlleq	\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1074 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
sika	cbrf	cigar		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 cigar		from English \'91cigar\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R442)		
\f0\i0 sika	sika	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \
sikaaq*	cbr62	smelt		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; may in fact be
\f0\i0  pond smelt
\f2\i  (Hypomesus olidus); sometimes called
\f0\i0  "cigarfish" 
\f2\i in local English, probably from the Yupik name
\f0\i0  sikaaq 
\f2\i sounding like English
\f0\i0  "cigar"	
\f2\i Osmerus mordax	
\f0\i0 capelin or grunion							called \'93grunion\'94 in SLI Cur. Man. 53	
\f2\i Mallotus villosus			
\f0\i0 smelt 
\f2\i (Osmerus mordax)
\f0\i0 ; capelin or grunion
\f2\i  (Mallotus villosus)		
\f0\i0 PY cika(C)aq				sikaq*	sikxq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u257 \u1179 \
sikeriiq	cbrsh72	cigarette		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 cigarette		from English \'91cigarette\'92	SLI Chuk.	
\f2\i  (R444)		
\f0\i0 sikeriq	sikerxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1251 \u1179 \
sikik	cbrbr	gound squirrel			squirrel (arctic ground ~)	
\f2\i Citellus parryi								
\f0\i0 arctic ground squirrel			arctic ground squirrel 
\f2\i (Citellus parryi)		
\f0\i0 PE cik9i!				sikik	sikik	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1080 \u1082 \
siklaate-	cbrk]9ns-	fall over of fall down (of a person, usually by tripping or slipping)		sikaatuq \'91he fell down\'92 / Mangteghanun kaanneghmini qagughmiguteghllagaqluni 
\f2\i siklaalluni
\f0\i0 . \'91Whenever he would come to a house, he would 
\f2\i fall over
\f0\i0  and bang his forehead.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:260)													to fall over or fall down (of a person, usually by tripping or slipping)		< siklagh-(u)te-				siklate-	siklxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\
siklagh-	cbrk]z4-	pick		ayveghet siklaghllagumakangat angyaq \'91the walruses had struck the boat with their tusks\'92	break through	strike with tusks											to use a pick; to break through; to strike with tusks				gloss 2, 3 CK Rub 442 CK 		siklagh-	siklagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
siklaghaq	cbrk]z4f2	pick(axe), small															small pick(axe)		< siklaq-ghaq				siklaghaq	siklaghaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
siklapegtaq	cbrk]zgs[nf2	stitch type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 type of stitch				see SLI Cur. Res. Man. 85		siklapegtaq	siklapegtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
siklaq	cbrk]z2	pick(axe)		siklaghniighaqut \'91they would use a pickaxe (to gather edible roots)\'92; qiinghutiluni piyaaniightem siklaghtaa suflugani \'91the hunter pointed his gun at the target, and pulled the trigger\'92	cocking piece of gun	hammer of gun											pick(axe); cocking piece or hammer of a gun		PE cikla3		hammer meaning from CK Rub 442		siklaq	siklaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
sikmuute-	cbrv8ns-	lunge forward		sikmuutuq \'91he lunged forward\'92 /	fall forward	die (slang)											to lunge forward; to fall forward; to die (slang)						sikmute-	sikmxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1084 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sikna-	cbry]f-	selfish		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  siknataghtuq \'91he's selfish or possessive\'92; siknayugtuq \'91he feels possessive of something\'92; siknakaa \'91he feels possessive of it, holds it dear\'92; siknanaghtuq \'91it is valuable\'92; siknanaq \'91valuable thing\'92; siknaketaq \'91selfish person\'92; siknaketiituq \'91he is unselfis\'92h; Unangegpenanga seghleghhalek ghhuughhaanka 
\f2\i siknayagutanka
\f0\i0 . \'91I didn\'92t get a single seal and 
\f2\i figured I should stop wasting
\f0\i0  my ammunition.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:154); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  siiknegh-	possessive	valuing								conserving			selfish; possessive; valuing; conserving		PE cikna-				sikna-	sikna-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 -\
Sikneq	Cbry]s2	Siknik Cape and Siknik Trapping Camp on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Siknik Cape and Siknik Trapping Camp on St. Lawrence Is.						Sikneq	Sikneq	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
siku	cbre	ice (either ocean or fresh water)		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  sikuk, 
\f2\i for the ice on the sea, lake, etc.; see item 70 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice (the ~ covering (or partially covering) the Bering Sea)	Bering Sea covered with ice											ice (either ocean or fresh water); the sea ice covering (or partially covering) the Bering Sea		PE ciku				siku	siku	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \
siku-	cbre-	get covered with ice		sikuuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  sikwaa \'91it froze over, ice has formed on it\'92 / naayvaq sikuuq, uksaaqanga \'91it is fall time now so the lake is frozen\'92; sapeghhnameng aywaaneng anuqlighllagluni naayvaq sikwaa sukalluni \'91since the cold northwind blew so hard it caused the lake to freeze fast\'92; sikumaa meq unegna \'91the ocean has gotten covered with ice\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sigugneq	freeze over												to get covered with ice; to freeze over						siku-	siku-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 -\
sikughaaq, sikughwaaq	cbre462. cbre4162	needlefish			stickleback	
\f2\i Pungitius pungitius							
\f0\i0 VK says only \'93minnow\'94				needlefish or stickleback 
\f2\i (Pungitius pungitius)		
\f0\i0 < siku-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		SLI Cur. Res. Man.		sikughwaq, sikughaq	sikughwxq, sikughxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 , \u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
sikughlluggaq	cbre5k]/[f2	ice, smooth, excellent for traveling															smooth ice field, excellent for traveling		< siku-lluggaq				sikughlluggaq	sikughlluggaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
sikughlluk	cbre5k]/r	thorn		Taagken 
\f2\i sikughllugtuqameng
\f0\i0  avayameng qaghpangllaghluku naasqwakun aatestekaat. \'91Then they made him put on his head a headdress of 
\f2\i thorny
\f0\i0  branches (\'93crown of 
\f2\i thorns
\f0\i0 \'94).\'92 (Matthew 27.29)	quill												thorn; quill		< sikuq-lluk				sikughlluk	sikughlluk	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
sikughnaq	cbre4yf2	icicle		
\f2\i may be used in dual, 
\f0\i0 sikughnak, 
\f2\i for one icicle; see item 72 in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	ice formed by snow melting and refreezing in a crust												icicle; sheet of ice hanging from edge of roof; ice formed by snow melting and refreezing in a crust		< siku-naq				sikughnaq	sikughnaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
sikughpak	cbre5gfr	needle, large, such as sail-making or upholstery needle															large needle such as sail-making or upholstery needle		< sikuq-ghpak				sikughpak	sikughpak	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \

\f1\b sikulghutaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub cbrek4enf2\super \'a1	\nosupersub needle case		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  sikulghutak
\f2\i , for one needlecase or sewing box	
\f0\i0 sewing box												needle case; sewing box		< sikuq-lghutaq				sikulghutaq	sikulghutaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 1\

\f1\b Sikulghutaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub Cbrek4enf2\super \'99	\nosupersub legendary expert seal hunter															legendary expert seal hunter		< siku-lghutaq		VK		sikulghutaq	sikulghutaq	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 2\
sikuliiq	cbrek72	ice (new thin sheet of sea ~ just moved in to land)		
\f2\i see item 73 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	water that froze on top of ice making the ice thicker												new thin sheet of sea ice just moved in to land; water that froze on top of ice making the ice thicker		< siku-li-aq				sikuliq	sikulxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1179 \
sikupik	cbregbr	ice (sheet of sea ~ thick enough to walk on)		
\f2\i see item 74 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	ice (regular ~)												sheet of sea ice thick enough to walk on; regular ice		< siku-pik				sikupik	sikupik	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
sikuq*	cbre2	needle		sikghwa \'91her needle\'92													needle		PE ciku3				sikuq*	sikuq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \
sikuqaaq	cbre262	ice (small chunk or collection of small chunks of floating sea ~)															small chunk or collection of small chunks of floating sea ice		< siku-?-				sikuqaq	sikuqxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \u257 \u1179 \
sikuqwaaghpak	cbre2165gfr	ice floe of medium size		
\f2\i see item 75 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												ice floe of medium size		< siku-kwaaq-ghpak				sikuqwaghpak	sikuqwxghpak	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
sikuqwaaq	cbre2162	ice (small amount or expanse of ~)		
\f2\i see item 76 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	small ice floe	isolated ice floe								sea ice type			small amount or expanse of ice; small or isolated ice floe		< siku-?		CK Oozeva 75		sikuqwaq	sikuqwxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
sikuvak	cbredfr	ice (large thick ~ floe or ~ field)		
\f2\i see item 77 on  list in Oozeva 
\f0\i0 et al. 2004	sea ice type												large thick ice floe		< siku-vag-				sikuvak	sikuvak	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
sikwaavreghaq	cbr16dhs4f2	ice, very thin			ice, small piece, floating at sea												very thin ice; small piece of ice floating at sea		< siku-?-vlaaq				sikwavreghaq	sikwxvreghaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1074 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
silimuqa	cbkbve2f	fly-agaric (fresh)			
\f2\i Amanita muscaria												
\f0\i0 fresh fly-agaric; 
\f2\i Amanita muscaria		
\f0\i0 from Chukchi cilimuq, pl. cilimuqet \'91poison\'92	14			silimuqa	silimuqa	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \
silimuqa-	cbkbve2f-	poison											check gloss \'91to sting, bite of insects\'92 (as in deR. 357)				to poison						silimuqa-	silimuqa-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 -\
siluk	cbk/r	feather		silungestaq, silusquq, silusqughhaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  silengestaq \'91tiny feather\'92													feather		PE culu!				siluk	siluk	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \
silunge-	cbk/3s-	fledged (become fully ~ (of bird))															to become fully fledged (of bird)	jgthzncz			CK Rub 445		silunge-	silunge-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1099 -\
simigh-	cbvb4-			simightuq \'91it changed or is changed\'92, \'91he changed his clothes\'92, \'91it got replaced\'92; simighaa \'91he changed it, replaced it\'92 / keneq simighaa \'91he changed the lightbulb\'92; atkuni simighaa \'91he changed his parka\'92													to change; to exchange; to replace		PE cimmi3-				simigh-	simigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 -\
simiin	cbv7y	replacement item		
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  simiita; = simiisiq	extra clothing												replacement item; extra clothing		< simigh-(u)n		VK		simin	simxn	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1251 \u1085 \
simiisiq 	cbv7cb2	replacement item		= simiin	extra clothing												replacement item; extra clothing		simigh-(u)siq		VK		simisiq	simxsiq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
singagh-	cb3f4-	kiss		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to kiss		PE ci&a3-				singagh-	singagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
singaghugh-	cb3f4e4-	kiss repeatedly		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to repeatedly kiss		< singagh-ugh-				singaghugh-	singaghugh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1271 -\
Singhaq	Cby4f2	village site east of Sireniki in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 village site east of Sireniki (Sighinek) in Chukotka				CK and others		Singhaq	Singhaq	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
singig-	cb3bu-	point (come to a ~)		singigtuq \'91it is pointed\'92 / singigtaa \'91he made it pointed\'92	pointed (be ~)												to come to a point; be pointed						singig-	singig-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1075 -\
singigh-	cb3b4-	tie one\'92s laces		singightuq \'91he tied his own laces\'92; singighaa \'91he tied his (another's) laces\'92 /													to tie one's laces						singigh-	singigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
singightuqaq	cb3b5ne2f2	strap attachment piece sewn in at welt of on skin-boot															strap attachment piece sewn in at welt of on skin-boot		< singiq-tuqaq (?)				singightuqaq	singightuqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
singigrakegte-	cb3buhfrs[ns-	sharp (have a sharp ~)															to have a sharp point		< singik-?-kegte-				singigrakegte-	singigrakegte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
singigrewaaq	cb3buhs162	knife, narrow, pointed															narrow pointed knife		< singik-?		VK		singigrewaq	singigrewxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1075 \u1088 \u1099 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
singiimangilnguq*	cb37vf3bk3e2	slovenly person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); literally
\f0\i0  \'91one who hasn\'92t tied his shoe laces\'92	slob												slovenly person; slob	yth[f	< singigh-(i/u)ma-ngite-nguq		CK Rub 446		singimangilnguq*	singxmangilnguq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1251 \u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
singik	cb3br	point		sikuum singiga \'91the tip of the needle\'92	tip												point; tip		PE ci&i!				singik	singik	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1082 \
singikrak	cb3brifr	summit of mountain		naaygham singikraga \'91the peak of the mountain\'92	top of tree, mountain, etc.	tip											summit of mountain; top of tree, mountain, etc.; tip		< singik-kraq		CK Rub 446		singikrak	singikrak	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
Singikrak	Cb3brifr	Northwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91small tip\'92; 
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Northwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.		< singik-krak				Singikrak	Singikrak	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
singilpayug-	cb3ek]gf/u-	tuck the laces of one\'92s boots in the top of the boots (due to being  in a hurry)		singilpayukiinaghluni aanuq taayughqem \'91he just tucked his laces in his boot because of being in a rush and went out\'92													to tuck the laces of one\'92s boots in the top of the boots (due to being in a hurry)		< singigh-?-		CK A & W 111		singilpayug-	singilpayug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 -\
singiq	cb3b2	bootlace			shoelace	lace for boot or shoe											bootlace; shoelace		PE ci&i3				singiq	singiq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
singlepegte-	cb3ksgs[ns-	limp		= senglepegte-													to limp						singlepegte-	singlepegte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sinit	cbybn	personally		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  ; ellnga sinit kiyaghneghwaaquq (kiyaghtaquq) \'91he lives alone\'92; ellngan sinitkesimaa uqigtuqaq qepghaqaq \'91he personally worked on a heavy (hard) task\'92	independently	alone											personally; independently; alone				CK Rub 445		sinit	sinit	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \
sipegte-	cbgs[ns-	strip the leaves from a stem		sipegtaa \'91he stripped it of leaves or liquid in this way\'92 / sipegmun \'91in a slipping or stripping way\'92	remove liquid from an object (garment, skin, rope, etc.) by running it through the space between one's thumb and forefinger which are at the tips												to strip the leaves from a stem; to remove liquid from an object (garment, skin, rope, etc.) by running it through the space between one's thumb and forefinger held together at the tips		PE cip0(!)-				sipegte-	sipegte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sipelaaghaq	cbgsk94f2	pigeon guillemot			guillemot (pigeon ~)	
\f2\i Cepphus columba											
\f0\i0 pigeon guillemot 
\f2\i (Cepphus columba) 						
\f0\i0 sipelaghaq	sipelxghaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
Sipenpak	Cbgsygfr	Seepanpak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Seepanpak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.						Sipenpak	Sipenpak	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
sipera	cbgshf	zipper															zipper		from English \'91zipper\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 161		sipera	sipera	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \
sipetughii-	cbgsne47-	have a lot left over		igleghalghiit aghneghmeng sipetughiigut takukameggnun kaalluteng \'91the travelers arrived at their destination with a lot of daylight still left\'92; nutaanllunguq unaghsimeng sipetughiimalghii mangteghangllalghii nunaaghmini \'91for the first time he had a lot of lumber left over when he was making a cabin at his camp\'92	finish with time to spare	arrive with time to spare											to have a lot left over; to finish or arrive with time to spare		PE cip0(t)-		CK A & W 111		sipetughi-	sipetughx-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1251 -\
sipitek	cbgbnsr	fish (two related ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exact meaning undetermined													
\f0\i0 two related fish	ldt cdzpfyys[ hs,s			CK Rub 447		sipitek	sipitek	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
sipsaq	cbgcz2	hip															hip		PE cipya3				sipsaq	sipsaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1087 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
siqagh-	cb2f4-	remove the frilly sides of a certain kind of kelp		siqaghtuq \'91he removed the sides from kelp\'92; siqaghaa \'91he removed the sides from it\'92 /													to remove the frilly sides of a certain kind of kelp						siqagh-	siqagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
siqaghaghte-	cb2f4f5ns-	cut or scrape one\'92s hand or arm or the like accidently 															to accidently cut or scrape one\'92s hand or arm or the like		< siqagh-aghte-		VK, and E&V 73		siqaghaghte-	siqaghaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
siqallghaq	cb2fk]5f2	rag used to wipe spills		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  siqallghat, 
\f2\i for one such rag;
\f0\i0  kuvulleq siqallghaneng sangighquumakanga \'91she wiped the spill with the rag\'92													rag used to wipe spills		PE ciq03- and ciq(q)i- (?)		CK A & W 111 CK 		siqallghaq	siqallghaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
siqfallag-	cb2afk[fu-	splash		qagit angliyalghiimeng sama siqfallagaqut \'91since the waves got bigger, they are splashing down there\'92													to splash		PE ciqpa!- or ciqpa3- (under PE ciq03- and ciq(q)i- )		CK A & W 111		siqfallag-	siqfallag-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1092 \u1072 \u1083 \u1093 \u1072 \u1075 -\
siqi-	cb2b-	splash on (him/it)		qaltak kuvqaghllukek aghnaghaghhaq siqii \'91she spilled the bucket of water and splashed on the little girl\'92													to splash on (him/it)		PE ciq03-		VK		siqi-	siqi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1080 -\
siqineghllugu-	cb2bys5k]/ue-	sunny		siqineghlluguuq \'91it is sunny\'92													for it to be sunny		< siqineq-lluk-(ng)u-				siqineghllugu-	siqineghllugu-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 -\
siqineq	cb2bys2	sun		siqineq nighugtuq \'91the sun is bright\'92; 
\f2\i Siqineq
\f0\i0  piinneghani nanevgaat aanleghaataqut aghnalqwaaghet unegtaqut. \'91When the 
\f2\i sun
\f0\i0  rises, the old men go out and the old women stay behind.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 48); Katam 
\f2\i siqineq
\f0\i0  tevighyan mekelghiiq qemimeng ukigumalghii\'85 . \'91When the 
\f2\i sun
\f0\i0  set the boy went down the hill.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 161)													the sun		PE ciqin03; < siqite-neq\super 2				\nosupersub siqineq	siqineq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
siqinghuugh-	cb2by484-	sunny (get ~)															to get sunny		< siqineq-(ng)u-ugh-				siqinghugh-	siqinghxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1263 \u1271 -\
siqinghwaaq	cb2by4162	broken glass		sigiqelleq siqinghwaaq kiliisiqumakanga eflughwaaghluku \'91she got a cut from the broken glass when she ran her hand over it\'92	glass												glass; broken glass		< siqineq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK A & W 111		siqinghwaq	siqinghwxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
siqinitagha-	cb2bybnf4f-	squint from the brightness of the sun															to squint from the brightness of the sun		< siqineq-?-				siqinitagha-	siqinitagha-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 -\
siqite-	cb2bns-	splash (it) out		siqitaa \'91he splashed it out\'92 /													to splash (it) out		PE ciq(q)it- (under PE ciq03-)				siqite-	siqite-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
siqlugaghqu-	cb2k]/uf52e-	take out meat from an underground cellar		Ugingan pimakanga, "Iyataghtunga, 
\f2\i siqlugaghqu
\f0\i0 ." \'91He husband said to her, \'93I\'92m hungry, 
\f2\i go get some meat from the cellar
\f0\i0 .\'94\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:20)													to take out meat from an underground cellar		< siqlugaq-ghqu-				siqlugaghqu-	siqlugaghqu-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 -\
Siqlugaghyaget	Cb2k]/uf4mzusn	Gambell, old village site in southern part of present-day Gambell		
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91numerous underground meat caches\'92; 
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices; 									
\f0\i0 where is this??				old village site in southern part of present-day Gambell		< siqlugaq-yaga\super e\nosupersub -
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Siqlugaghyaget	Siqlugaghyaget	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \
siqlugaq	cb2k]/uf2	underground meat cellar		
\f2\i Siqlugalwaaqsaghtukut
\f0\i0 , maaten 
\f2\i siqlugapagiisimaaq
\f0\i0 . \'91We used to have 
\f2\i underground meat cellars
\f0\i0 , but now 
\f2\i the underground meat cellar
\f0\i0  is a thing of the past.\'92 (MRS. DELLA W. 10)	hold of a ship												underground meat cellar; hold of a ship		PE ciqlu!a3		gloss 2: CK Rub 444		siqlugaq	siqlugaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
siqlugiigh-	cb2k]/u74-	take out special meat from the cellar for a feast															to take out special meat from the cellar  for a feast		< siqlughaq-?-				siqlugigh-	siqlugxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1251 \u1271 -\
siqlugiiqaq	cb2k]/u72f2	special meat stored in the cellar for a feast															special meat stored in the cellar for a feast		< siqlugiigh-(e)kaq				siqlugiqaq	siqlugxqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1251 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
Siqlugmii(t)	Cb2k/uv7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)															a particular clan				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 146	xxxt	Siqlugmi(t)	Siqlugmx(t)	\u1057 \u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Siqluk	Cb2k]/r	former village on Yttygran Is. in Chukotkan		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices; cf. 
\f0\i0 siqlugaq	Yttygran Is. in Chukotka												former village on Yttygran Is. in Chukotkan and Yttygran Is. itself						Siqluk	Siqluk	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
siqni-	cb2y]b-	covet something		siqniiq \'91he covets something\'92, \'91he is envious\'92; siqnii \'91he covets it\'92 /	envious (be ~)								VK says \'91to envy\'92				to covet something; to be envious		PE ciqni-				siqni-	siqni-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1080 -\
siqsimi-	cb2cbvb-	refrain from doing something in hopes or with the expectation that another will do it 		sangwaa qepghaghyaghqaq siqsimim qenwat uglaghighllagtuq \'91the things to do became many on account of one\'92s waiting for someone to do them\'92; siqsimifqaafsi piighaghtaghaqitek \'91don\'92t wait for someone (else) to do it, (you\sub pl\nosupersub ) do it immediately\'92; siqsimim qenwat uglaaghighllagtuq sangwaa qepghaghyaghqaq \'91on account of waiting for someone else to do it, the work has piled up\'92	leave a task for someone else												to refrain from doing something in hopes or with the expectation that another will do it; to leave a task for someone else				CK A & W 112		siqsimi-	siqsimi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 -\
Siquvek	Cb2edsr	Seakoovook Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Seakoovook Bay on St. Lawrence Is.						Siquvek	Siquvek	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1082 \
siraq	cbhf2	tip of harpoon		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 tip of harpoon	yfrjytxybr ufhgeyf			CK Rub 447		siraq	siraq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
sisaawi-	cbc91b-	understand		sisaawiiq \'91he sensed something\'92 /	sense	surmise											to sense; to surmise; to understand		from Chukchi cicew0k \'91guess\'92	14		sisaawiketagh-	sisawi-	sisxwi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1080 -\
sisaawike-	cbc91brs-	figure (it) out		sisaawikaa \'91he figured it out\'92	sense (it) 	surmise concerning (it)											to figure (it) out; to sense (it); to surmise concerning (it)		< sisaawi-ke\super 1\nosupersub -	14		sisaawiketagh-	sisawike-	sisxwike-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
sisaawiketagh-	cbc91brsnf4-	quick-witted (be ~)			perceptive (be ~)												to be quick-witted; to be perceptive		< sisaawi-ketagh-				sisawiketagh-	sisxwiketagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sisaawisaghagh-	cbc91bcf4f4-	hints (give ~)															to give hints		< sisaawi-?-		VK		sisawisaghagh-	sisxwisaghagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1080 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sisela	cbcskz	chisel		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 chisel	cnfvtcrf	from English \'91chisel\'92	Chuk.	CK V&E83; R448		sisela	sisela	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1089 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \
siseru	cbcshe	sausage of reindeer gut filled with fat															sausage of reindeer gut filled with fat		from Chukchi ?, or just maybe from English \'91sausage\'92?				siseru	siseru	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1089 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \
sitegh-	cbns4-	patch a skin boat		siitghaa \'91he patched it\'92 /													to patch a skin boat						sitegh-	sitegh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 -\
siteguq	cbnsre2	sinew from front leg of reindeer		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 sinew from front leg of reindeer				CK Rub 448		siteguq	siteguq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \
siteq	cbns2	patch on skin boat		siitgha \'91its patch\'92													patch on skin boat						siteq	siteq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \
sitevaq	cbnsdf2	raw sea mammal meat eaten with plant roots and blubber		sitevat pinilghiit kuyagem kemekragi samun tangimun \'91meat from the upper part of the backbone of seal is good to be eaten raw with plant roots and blubber\'92													raw sea mammal meat eaten with plant roots and blubber				CK A & W 112		sitevaq	sitevaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
sitiiwen	cbn71sy	certainty (with ~)		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 compensation (as ~)												with certainty; as compensation		from Chukchi ?	x			sitiwen	sitxwen	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1251 \u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \
Sitilaq	Cbnbkz2	Siteeluk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Siteeluk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.						Sitilaq	Sitilaq	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1090 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \
sivaaghtuqaq	cbd65ne2f2	squirrel															squirrel		< sivaaq-tuqaq				sivaghtuqaq	sivxghtuqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
sivaaq	cbd62	molar															molar		PE civu(C)a3 (under PE civu-)				sivaq	sivxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u257 \u1179 \
Sivaaq	Cbd62	Sevak Camp on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices; used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 Sivaaghet, 
\f2\i for the surrounding around													
\f0\i0 Sevak Camp on St. Lawrence Is.						Sivaq	Sivxq	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1074 \u257 \u1179 \
sivillagte-	cbdbk]z[ns-	splash (it)		qaltak meghmeng imalgek kuufqaghllukek kameraaghqek sivillagtaak \'91she accidentally spilled the bucket of water and splashed on his shoes\'92; mekelghiighhaak pugimaallghiik nenglaasimaagmek sivillagtaghtuk \'91the little boys that are swimming are laughing splashing about\'92													to splash (it)				VK		sivillagte-	sivillagte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sivu	cbde	front		angyam sivunga \'91the front of the boat\'92; sivungani \'91before it\'92	bow of boat	before (time ~)							should Sivuqaq be under this?? It should go under sivuq?, CK	face			front; bow of boat; time before; face of something		PE civu-				sivu	sivu	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \
sivug-	cbdeu-	tilted (head ~ up)		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  sivugtuq \'91he tilted up his (own) head\'92; sivugtaa \'91he tilted up his (another's) head\'92; sivugngaaq \'91he has his head tilted up\'92													head tilted up		PE civ(v)u!-				sivug-	sivug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1075 -\
sivugh-	cbde4-	wring out		sivughaa \'91he wrung it out\'92 / sivughiiq \'91he wrung out something\'92; siqallghani sivughaa \'91she wrung out her washrag\'92													to wring out		PE civvu3-				sivugh-	sivugh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1271 -\
sivughaq	cbde4f2	edible plant stored in oil for winter 		
\f2\i Chukotkan; exact identification not known													
\f0\i0 edible plant stored in oil for winter						sivughaq	sivughaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
sivughisiq	cbde4bcb2	wringer		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  sivughisik, 
\f2\i for one wringer (with its two rollers)													
\f0\i0 wringer		< sivugh-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq				sivughisiq	sivughisiq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
Sivughqa	Cbde52f	site east of Cape Stoletiia in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site east of Cape Stoletiia in Chukotka		< sivu-?				Sivughqa	Sivughqa	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \
Sivugnaa	Cbdeuy6	Seevoonah Mt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Seevoonah Mt. on St. Lawrence Is.		< sivu-?				Sivugna	Sivugnx	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u257 \
Sivugnaq	Cbdeuyf2	site on the coast east of Gambell		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on the coast east of Gambell						Sivugnaq	Sivugnaq	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
sivuke-	cbders-	first (do, be or occur ~)		
\f2\i usually used in the subordinative agreeing in regard to transitivity with the main verb;  Sivukluku
\f0\i0  Ayngera ugiksaqanga, Paallengetaq panikluku. \'91
\f2\i First
\f0\i0  she had a husband, Ayngera, and Paallengetaq was their daughter.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:20); 
\f2\i Sivukluninguq
\f0\i0  Tapghukun nelikaaftuq. \'91First, they say, he made his home at Tapghuq.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:26); Kiinghagu, 
\f2\i sivukluteng
\f0\i0  kiiwet pingaghtuutaqut. \'91Whenever it was summer, 
\f2\i first
\f0\i0  the rivers would all melt.\'92 (MRS. DELLA W. 6); Enkaam 
\f2\i sivukluku
\f0\i0  Ungazighmiim nelikaqsaqanga maana Sivungaq, Mayukaam. \'91And 
\f2\i first
\f0\i0  to settle in Savoonga was the Siberian, Mayukaq.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:2); 
\f2\i Sivukeghpigaghlunga
\f0\i0  liisalghiinga \'85. \'91When became aware of things 
\f2\i for the very first time
\f0\i0  \'85.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:130)	do first	be first								occur first			to do, be or occur first		< sivu-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				sivuke-	sivuke-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 -\
sivukun	cbderey	first (at ~)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 at first	cyfxfkf	< sivu-
\f2\i vialis		
\f0\i0 CK V & E 125; Rub 439		sivukun	sivukun	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
sivulii-	cbdek7-	first (be the ~ one)		sivuliiguq \'91he is the first one\'92 /													to be the first one		< sivuliq-(ng)u-				sivuli-	sivulx-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 -\
Sivulin	Cbdekby	Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. (projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus toward east end of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus toward east end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		< sivu-?				Sivulin	Sivulin	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \
Sivuliq aghneq	Cbdekb2 f4ys2	Sunday		
\f2\i so called because Sunday is the first day of the week; Sivulighpigaghmi aghneghani
\f0\i0  santillghem, unaangupiglluku, \'85. \'91Very early on 
\f2\i Sunday
\f0\i0  morning, \'85.\'92 (Luke 24.1)													Sunday					xxxa	Sivuliq aghneq	Sivuliq aghneq	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179  \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
sivuliq*	cbdekb2	first one		taam qikmim sivulii qilugyuneghtuyaghtuq \'91the one coming in front of that dog barks a lot\'92; qikmighaghhaam itegaan siulii qateghtut \'91the puppy\'92s front paws are white\'92	front	predecessor								before (one ~)			first one; front; one before; predecessor	gthdsq	< sivu-liq		gloss 2: CK Rub 439 CK		sivuliq*	sivuliq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
sivullagh-	cbdek]z4-	ahead of time (go ~)															to go ahead of time		< sivu-?-				sivullagh-	sivullagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
sivullaghqugh-	cbdek]z52e4-	lead			leader (be the ~)												to lead; to be the leader		< sivullagh-?-		VK		sivullaghqugh-	sivullaghqugh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
sivullgaagh-	cbdek][64-	go ahead of others		esavghalghiit angyat angyallightengit sivullgaaghaqut \'91when crews pull their boats on ice, the captain is in front of the boat\'92	ahead (go ~ of others)												to go ahead of others		< sivu-?-		CK A & W 112 CK 		sivullgagh-	sivullgxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u257 \u1271 -\
sivullgaagh-	cbdek][64-	start out before the others															to start out before the others		< sivu-?-		VK		sivullgagh-	sivullgxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u257 \u1271 -\
sivullgaghtagh-	cbdek][f5nf4-	interrupt others talking															to interrupt others talking		sivu-?-		VK		sivullgaghtagh-	sivullgaghtagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sivullughquun	cbdek]/528y	food that is eaten first		neghnaqelghiini sivukluki neghyaghqat maghyaghqelliitmeng nalighmen sivullughquutmeng aatqelghiit \'91at meal time, the food that is eaten first is called the \'93lead course\'94 or the \'93first course\'94\'92	first course at a meal												food that is eaten first; first course at a meal		< sivu-?-(u)n		CK A & W 47		sivullughqun	sivullughqxn	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1085 \
Sivulqut	Cbdek]2en	Sivolkut (Cape ~ in Chukotka)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Cape Sivolkut in Chukotka		< sivu-?-quq-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Sivulqut	Sivulqut	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \
sivuneq	cbdeys2	ancestor		sivunghi \'91his ancestors\'92 or \'91his predecessors\'92; \'85 
\f2\i sivunghet
\f0\i0  tuqlughaqluki tagilaghaatesqelluki kenghem asinganun neghesnaqniluki eghqwaaghaqegkangit.  \'91\'85 they called to 
\f2\i the ancestors
\f0\i0  (in the nether world) telling them to underneath the fire so that they could feed them in ceremony of making food offerings.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:242); sivunghani \'91in previous times\'92	predecessor	previous times											ancestor; predecessor; previous times		< sivu-neq				sivuneq	sivuneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Sivungaq*	Cbde3f2	Savoonga		Sivungaghmi \'91at Savoonga\'92; Sivungaghmiit \'91the people of Savoonga\'92; 
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Savoonga		< sivu-?				Sivungaq*	Sivungaq*	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \
sivungigh-	cbde3b4-	get ahead of		ivaghiniightem sivungiimaa nanevgaq yuliimaa pinilghii anglu \'91the hunter got ahead of the old man and took the good fishing hole\'92													to get ahead of		< sivu-(ng)igh-		CK A & W 112 CK		sivungigh-	sivungigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
sivungiite-	cbde37ns-	get to (it) ahead of others		tepaq sivungiitaa qaviitutmineng \'91he got to the edible sealife that had drifted onto the seashore ahead of the others since he wakes up early\'92; nunavaget sivungiitiit sukatutmeggneng \'91they got to the walruses on the ice ahead of the others due to their speed\'92													to get to (it) ahead of others		< sivungigh-(u)te-		CK A & W 112 CK		sivungite-	sivungxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Sivuqaa	Cbde26	Northeast Cape on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Northeast Cape on St. Lawrence Is.		< sivu-qaq-?				Sivuqa	Sivuqx	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1179 \u257 \
Sivuqaan	Cbde26y	Camp Kulowiye at the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Seevookhan Mt. at the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is.												Camp Kulowiye and Seevookhan Mt. at the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is.		< sivu-?				Sivuqan	Sivuqxn	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1179 \u257 \u1085 \
Sivuqaq	Cbde2f2	Gambell		Sivuqami \'91at Gambell\'92 or \'91at St. Lawrence Is.\'92; Sivuqaghmiit 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  Sivuqaghhmiit \'91the people of Gambell\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91St. Lawrence Islanders\'92; Sivuqagh(h)miitestun \'91in the language of St. Lawrence Island\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91in the dialect of St. Lawrence Island (as opposed to Chukotka)\'92; Qiighqaq esghaqaaluni llangaqa qetkaq inglupigaghmeng iiggmeng, enkaam aatqaa 
\f2\i Sivuqaq
\f0\i0 , Ulimaghistem sivuqaa. The Island looks as if it had been squeezed with one hand, and it has the name \'93
\f2\i Sivuqaq
\f0\i0 \'94, the one wrung out by the Creator.\'92 (KALLAG. 8); 
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 St. Lawrence Is.												Gambell; St. Lawrence Island		< sivugh- kaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  sivu-qaq				Sivuqaq	Sivuqaq	\uc0\u1057 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
sivuqliq*	cbde2k]b2	first one			front one	neighbor											first one; front one; neighbor		< sivu-qliq		gloss  three: CK Rub 439		sivuqliq*	sivuqliq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
sivutmun	cbdenvey	frontwards; forewards															frontwards; foreward	dgthtl	< sivu-tmun		CK V & E 118, CK		sivutmun	sivutmun	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1090 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
sivuughagh-	cbd84f4-	overwhelmed (feel ~)		sivuughaghtuq \'91he feels he cannot go on\'92 / sivuughaatkaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  sivuughaasiqaa \'91he feels he cannot go on because of it, with it, or for her\'92; 
\f2\i Sivuughaqestaghngaamkun
\f0\i0  quyngiqa naavyighnayukan pingayiitaqa. \'91Even though I was 
\f2\i hesitant
\f0\i0  about it fearing that my reindeer might get tired out, I put a third load on them.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:78); sivuughaghnaq \'91a person or thing that makes one feel that he cannot proceed as one would like, such as a sick person who shouldn\'92t be left alone\'92	hesitant (feel ~)	defeated (feel ~)								aprehensive (be ~)			to feel overwhelmed; to feel hesitant; to be apprehensive; to feel defeated	pfnhelyztncz\\ yt htiftncz 	PE civu(C)u3a-		CK V & E 146; Rub 439		sivughagh-	sivxghagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1263 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sivuyagta	cbdez[nf	man at bow of boat who spots and spears game			striker	harpooner											striker; man at bow of boat who spots and spears game; harpooner		PE civuya!t0; < sivuyak-ta				sivuyagta	sivuyagta	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \
sivuyak	cbdezr	bow, specifically of boat															bow, specifically of boat		< sivu-yak				sivuyak	sivuyak	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1074 \u1091 \u1103 \u1082 \
siwaaru, siwaaraaq	cbu16he. cbu16h62	grayish red		
\f2\i Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0 Quyaaq Ukaziq. Taagken kenlanga Ukazim simighaqaa melquni: uksumi \'96 qateghtaqaa, kiigmi \'96 
\f2\i siwaaghungughtaqaa
\f0\i0 . \'91Hare was happy. From then on Hare would change his fur: in winter he\'92d become white, and in summer he\'92d become 
\f2\i grayish red
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AANGHHAQ 37)	gray												gray; grayish red	cthj-hs;bq	from Chukchi ciwaro \'91gray\'92		CK V & E 133; Rub 448		siwaru	siwxru	\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1265 \u257 \u1088 \u1091 , \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1265 \u257 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
suflitagh-	c/ak]bnf4-	lying on the stomach		postural root; suflitaghtuq \'91he lay down on his stomach\'92; suflitaghtaa \'91he lay her on her stomach\'92; suflitaghngaaq \'91he is lying on his stomach\'92; Taagken kaallutek esghaamakangak 
\f2\i suflitaghmi
\f0\i0 . \'91Then, when they\sub 2\nosupersub  arrived, 
\f2\i lying
\f0\i0  on her stomach she saw them\sub 2\nosupersub .\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 73)	stomach (lying on ~)												lying on stomach						suflitagh-	suflitagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
suflitaghtagh-	c/ak]bnf5nf4-	lie around on one\'92s stomach															to lie around on one\'92s stomach		< suflitagh-tagh\super 2\nosupersub -				suflitaghtagh-	suflitaghtagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
suflu, sufluq	c/ak]/\\ c/ak]/2	tube		suflunga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  suflaa \'91its tube, cavity\'92; Sukilpaat 
\f2\i suflumi
\f0\i0  ighnikayuget. \'91Auklets lay eggs in the 
\f2\i cavities between rocks
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 153); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sufluk	cavity	cave											tube; cavity; cave		PE cuplu!				suflu, sufluq	suflu, sufluq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 ; \u1089 \u1102 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \
suflugagh-	ceak]/uf4-	shoot (a gun)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to shoot (a gun)				CK Rub 460 CK 		suflugagh-	suflugagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1091 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
suflugaghwaaq	c/ak]/uf4162	pistol															pistol		< suflugaq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				suflugaghwaq	suflugaghwxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
suflugaq	c/ak]/uf2	gun			rifle												gun; rifle		< sufluk-ghaq				suflugaq	suflugaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
suflughtaq	c/ak]/5nf2	blue king crab			crab (blue king ~)	
\f2\i Paralithodes platypus											
\f0\i0 blue king crab 
\f2\i (Paralithodes platypus)		
\f0\i0 < suflu-?-				suflughtaq	suflughtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
suflugpak	ceak]/[gfr	horn (as of car)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 = seflugpak	whistle (factory ~)												horn (as of a car); factory whistle	ueljr	< sufluk-ghpak		CK Rub 461		suflugpak	suflugpak	\uc0\u1089 \u1091 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
suflugrak	c/ak]/uhfr	tube			barrel of gun	pipe (for liquid)								hose			tube; gun barrel; pipe (for liquid); hose		< sufluk-?				suflugrak	suflugrak	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
sufluk	c/ak]/r	chimney		
\f2\i Suflugkat
\f0\i0  sangwaat, egllukaghqameng Pedersen tagitkayugulghii saagngalghiimeng, galvanize-et sangwaat egllukaghqaghllaget entaqun whaten plywood-estun angkalghiit. \'91Petersen brough material for 
\f2\i stovepipes
\f0\i0  and stoves, galvanized sheets the size of a piece of plywood.\'92(SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:70); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  suflu	stovepipe												chimney; stovepipe		PE cuplu!				sufluk	sufluk	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
suflungumalghii	c/ak]/3evfk47	cavity in tooth															cavity in tooth		< suflu-nge-(i/u)ma-lghii				suflungumalghi	suflungumalghx	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1187 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
sufluqaghte-	ceak]/2f5ns-	pierce through		maklak naasqwakun guulluku, sufluqaghsimalghii ghhuuq \'91he shot the bearded seal on the head, and the bullet went all the way through\'92; = sefluqaghte-													to pierce through				CK Rub 461 CK		sufluqaghte-	sufluqaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1091 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sugag-	c/ufu-	offended (feel ~)		sugagtuq\'92 he felt offened\'92 / sugagtestaa \'91he offended her\'92; sugakaa \'91he felt offended on account of it or for him\'92													to feel offended		PE cu!a!-				sugag-	sugag-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1075 -\
sugake-	c/ufrs-	offended (feel ~ on account of (it) or for (him))		sugakaa \'91he feels offended on account of it or for him\'92 /													to feel offended on account of (it) or for (him)		< sugag-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				sugake-	sugake-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
sugenreq	ceusyhs2	current, strong		Seghleghhalek seghleghunaqukut, ingavek atneghaanun lliiqumta 
\f2\i sugenreghmun
\f0\i0 , ukut nayumta unilleqiinkut. \'91It\'92s going to be bad for us if we get into the 
\f2\i strong current
\f0\i0  at the cape, as those [ice floes protecting us] will go away from us.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:122)													strong current				CK Nagai CK		sugenreq	sugenreq	\uc0\u1089 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1085 \u1088 \u1099 \u1179 \
suggutaq	c/[enf2	strap for dragging dead animals		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 strap for dragging dead animals				CK Rub 468		suggutaq	suggutaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sughma	c/4vf	chess			checkers												chess; checkers		from Russian if[vfns (shaxmaty) \'91chess\'92, via Chukchi c\'92umet \'91chess\'92	15			sughma	sughma	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1084 \u1072 \
sughma-	c/4vf-	play chess or checkers															to play chess or checkers						sughma-	sughma-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1084 \u1072 -\
sughmavik	c/4vfdbr	checkerboard patterned cloth or other surface			plaid												checkerboard patterned cloth or other surface; plaid		< sughma-vik				sughmavik	sughmavik	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1084 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
Sughmeghaat	C/4vs46n	Soomeghat on St. Lawrence Is		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Soomeghat on St. Lawrence Is.						sughmeghat	sughmeghxt	\uc0\u1057 \u1102 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \
sughmeghaq	c/4vs4f2	red phalarope			phalarope, red	
\f2\i Phalaropus fulicarius											
\f0\i0 red phalarope (Phalaropus fulicarius)						sughmeghaq	sughmeghaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
sughmetku-	c/4vsnre-	fix rough spots on a reindeer skin after tanning it		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to fix rough spots on a reindeer skin after tanning it		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 462		sughmetku-	sughmetku-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 -\
sughraaghwtaq	c/4h614nf2	shooting star (a flowering plant)			
\f2\i Dodecatheon fridgidum												
\f0\i0 shooting star
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 (a flowering plant)
\f2\i (Dodecatheon fridgidum)	
\f0\i0 Ljltrantjy [jkjlysq			from Aynganga\'92s article in \'93Beringia\'94		sughraghwtaq	sughrxghwtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1265 \u1271 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sughu	c/4e	wind-parka, woman\'92s, made of dried walrus gut decorated with reddened strips of unborn seal skin		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 sughut
\f2\i , or dual, 
\f0\i0 sughuk, 
\f2\i for one such wind-parka													
\f0\i0 woman's wind-parka made of dried walrus gut decorated with reddened strips of unborn seal skin						sughu	sughu	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1091 \
sughug-	c/4eu-	attack (of animals or people)		sughugtuq (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  sughugiiq) \'91it attacked someone\'92; sughugaa \'91it attacked him\'92 / kayngeghllagem sughugtughaa \'91a great big brown bear chased after him\'92	chase	charge											to attack (of animals or people); to chase; to charge		PE cu39u!-				sughug-	sughug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1091 \u1075 -\
sughukaq	c/4erf2	guest at festival		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 attacker												guest at festival; attacker	ujcn], ghbukfityysq yf ghfplybr; xtkjdtr, yfgfdibq yf rjuj-k	+ PY cu3ukaq \'91festival; guest a festival\'92 (under PE cu39u!-)(cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik cu3ukaq \'91festival\'92		CK V & E 98		sughukaq	sughukaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
sugighpagtagh-	c/ub5gf[nf4-	redden in blotches due to emotion (of face)		sugagniighem repall gginaa sugighpagtaghtuq \'91he got so offended that his face developed red blotches\'92													to develop red blotches due to emotion (of face)				CK A & W 112		sugighpagtagh-	sugighpagtagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1080 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sugllekegte-	c/[k]srs[ns-	hit, touch or scratch slightly		taghnughhaat milughmigulluteng naasqwakun sugllekegtemmeng miluumakanga uyghagmeng \'91the children were throwing rocks at each other and one was grazed on his head\'92; llaaghinaannguq sugllekegtemmeng unakumaa \'91good thing he hit it slightly\'92	touch or scratch slightly	scratch slightly								graze (of thrown thing)			to slightly hit, touch or scratch; to graze (of thrown thing)				CK A & W 112		sugllekegte-	sugllekegte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sugri-	c/uhb-	discolored (get ~ (red or blue) around the mouth due to cold)															to get discolored (red or blue) around the mouth due to cold		< sugruk-li-				sugri-	sugri-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u1080 -\
sugriitaan	ceuh7n6y	strap, additional, on boot (the loop for it is sewn on the front part of the sole)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 additional strap on boot (the loop for it is sewn on the front part of the sole)				CK Rub 461		sugritan	sugrxtxn	\uc0\u1089 \u1091 \u1075 \u1088 \u1251 \u1090 \u257 \u1085 \
sugrugiitaq	c/uheu7nf2	muzzle for dog															dog muzzle		< sugruk-(ng)iitaq				sugrugitaq	sugrugxtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sugrugmighqu-	ceuheuvb52e-	poke in the snout		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to poke in the snout	nsrfnm vjhljq	< sughruk-mik-?-		CK Rub 462		sugrugmighqu-	sugrugmighqu-	\uc0\u1089 \u1091 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 -\
sugrugta	ceuhe[nf	bridle		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 bridle	eplf	< sugruk-?		CK Rub 462		sugrugta	sugrugta	\uc0\u1089 \u1091 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \
sugrugtaq	ceuhe[nf2	one with a long muzzle		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 animal with a long snout	person with a long nose											one with a long muzzle; animal with a long snout; person with a long nose		< sugruk-?		CK Rub 462		sugrugtaq	sugrugtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1091 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sugruk	c/uher	beak		sugrugek \'91beak or snout including lower and upper parts\'92; qikmim sugrugmineng tenpaaqwaanga aanaluni \'91the dog nudged me with its snout when it wanted to go out\'92	bill (of bird)	snout											beak; bill; snout		PE cu!9u!				sugruk	sugruk	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
sugtuvak	c/[nedfr	whimbrel			
\f2\i Numenius phaeopus								
\f0\i0 according to SLI Cur. Man. 55 this is the \'93far eastern curlew\'94, a similar looking bird (same genus) but quite rare in the area				whimbrel (Numenius phaeopus)		< sugruk-vak (?)				sugtuvak	sugtuvak	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
sugugte-	c/u/[ns-	go ashore		Taakwagun 
\f2\i suguglluteng
\f0\i0 , yugita angaghqughaqegkangit. \'91After they 
\f2\i went ashore
\f0\i0  the men would take [their things up].\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:40)	ashore (go ~)	stop ashore when traveling by boat											to go ashore; to stop ashore when traveling by boat				VK		sugugte-	sugugte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b sugukelengiiq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c/uersks372\super \'a1	\nosupersub mosquito		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sugukelengiiq\super 2
\f2\i \nosupersub , which may actaually be the same word with a figurative meaning 									
\f0\i0 sugrugpallengenghaaq in Rub 462				mosquito						sugukelengiq1	sugukelengxq1	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1251 \u1179 1\

\f1\b sugukelengiiq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c/uersks3b2\super \'99	\nosupersub tent (temporary ~ made from oars covered with skins, used by boat travelers when caught in a storm)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sugukelengiiq\super 1
\f2\i \nosupersub , which may actually be the same word with its literal meaning 													
\f0\i0 temporary tent made from oars covered with skins, used by boat travelers when caught in a storm				CK Rub 462; known by Aymetghawen, and remembered by Beda Slwooko		sugukelengiq2	sugukelengxq2	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 2\
sugupak	ceuegfr	nostril area of animal (especially sea mammal)		Uka mayughlaataghtuq, nuuglaataghaa 
\f2\i sugupagem
\f0\i0 . \'91It came up; the 
\f2\i nostrils of a sea mammal [a seal]
\f0\i0  poked through again.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 86)	upper lip area extending to the nostrils												nostril area of animal (especially sea mammal); upper lip area extending to the nostrils	yjplhz pdthz			CK Rub 462 CK; Akiingqwaghneghet 112		sugupak	sugupak	\uc0\u1089 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
sugute-	c/uens-	put boat up on land or ice for a little while traveling 		Sivungaghtat angyat taakwani tumemi Tapghukun sugugtut \'91the boat going to Savoonga stopped at Tapghuk for a little while on the way\'92													to put boat up on land or ice for a little while traveling 				CK A & W 112		sugute-	sugute-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
suka-	c/rf-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > sukaghhalek, sukaghi-, sukaghllak, sukalqaq, sukangiite-, sakangite-, sukate-, sukera-															PE cuk(k)a-				suka-	suka-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 -\
sukaghhalek	c/rf5fksr	fast (so ~!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle													
\f0\i0 so fast!		< suka-ghhalek				sukaghhalek	sukaghhalek	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
sukaghi-	c/rf4b-	fast (become ~)		sukaghiiq \'91he/it became fast\'92 / Llaaghanwha 
\f2\i sukaghimalghii
\f0\i0  saama iknaqughimalghii. \'91Consequently he 
\f2\i had become fast
\f0\i0  and strong.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 67)													to become fast		< suka-(gh/l)i-				sukaghi-	sukaghi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1080 -\
sukaghllak	c/rf5k]zr	fast (very ~ thing)		Tengegkayugem veghakek uzivlutek 
\f2\i sukaghllaguuk
\f0\i0 . \'91The airplane\'92s propellers turn 
\f2\i fast
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 174)													very fast thing		< suka-ghllak				sukaghllak	sukaghllak	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
sukallaagh-	c/rfk]64-	tell one to hurry		angyaghnaqelghiit yugteng sukallaaghaat kinguqaataqnayukangisteng \'91when the boat was about to go out, they told one of their crew members to hurry so they won\'92t be late for the game\'92													to tell one to hurry		< suka-?-		CK A & W 112 CK; Rub 463		sukallagh-	sukallxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u257 \u1271 -\
sukalqaq	c/rfk]2f2	fast runner															fast runner		< suka-?				sukalqaq	sukalqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
sukanghagh-	c/rfy4f4-	race		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  ellnga sukanghaghaquq llangaqa \'91he seems to be rushing along\'92	speed along	rush											to race; to speed along; to rush		< suka-?-		CK Rub 463		sukanghagh-	sukanghagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sukangiite-	c/rf37ns-	slow down		sukangiituq \'91it is slowing down, has slowed down\'92 /													to slow down		< suka-ngigh-(u)te-				sukangite-	sukangxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sukangite-	c/rf3bns-	slow (be ~)		sukangituq \'91it is slow\'92 / sukangilluni (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  sukangunani) \'91being slow\'92)													to be slow		< suka-(ng)ite-				sukangite-	sukangite-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sukate-	c/rfns-	fast (go or be ~)		sukatuq \'91it/he is going fast\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he does things fast\'92/ sukalnguq \'91the fast one\'92; sukallghat \'91the fastest of them\'92													to go or be fast		< suka-te\super 3\nosupersub -				sukate-	sukate-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sukera-	c/rshf-	hurry		sukeraaq \'91he is hurrying \'91/ Naayvamun 
\f2\i sukeraaqukut
\f0\i0  atghiinemta, nenglaamaamta, ilaagaamaamta, \'85 \'91We would 
\f2\i go faster and faster
\f0\i0  down to the lake, laughing and singing, \'85\'94 (KALLAGNEGHET 40)	fast (be going very ~)												to hurry; to be going very fast		< suka-?-				sukera-	sukera-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 -\
sukeraragkiigh-	c/rshfhf[r74-	fast (go extremely ~)															to go extremely fast		< sukera-ragkiigh-				sukeraragkigh-	sukeraragkxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1093 \u1082 \u1251 \u1271 -\
sukilpaq*	c/rbk]gf2	crested auklet		sukilpaat \'91crested auklets\'92	auklet (crested ~)	
\f2\i Aethia cristatella											
\f0\i0 crested auklet (Aethia cristatella)		PE cukilpak \'91crested auklet\'92 (cf. Nunivak Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik cuki@pak \'91crested auklet\'92)				sukilpaq*	sukilpaq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \
sukite-	c/rbns-	splinter (get a ~ in one\'92s flesh)		sukituq \'91he got a splinter\'92 /													to get a splinter in one's flesh		PE cukkit- (under PE cuki(3))				sukite-	sukite-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sukitun	c/rbney	splinter															splinter		< sukite-(u)n				sukitun	sukitun	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
suklugraq	c/rk]/uhf2	parakeet auklet			auklet (parakeet ~)	
\f2\i Cyclorrhynchus psittacula											
\f0\i0 parakeet auklet (Cyclorrhynchus psittacula)		PY cukluk				suklugraq	suklugraq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
suksugtaq	c/rc/[nf2	primus or similar pressure stove		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  suksugtak
\f2\i , for one stove	
\f0\i0 pressure stove	stove (primus or similar pressure ~)											primus or similar pressure stove		< suksuk-taq\super ?				\nosupersub suksugtaq	suksugtaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
suksuk	c/rc/r	grating noise as of waves on gravel beach			hissing noise as of waves on gravel beach												grating or hissing noise as of waves on gravel beach		imitative				suksuk	suksuk	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
sulaawi-	c/k91b-	fatigued (be ~ from lack of rest or from strenuous work)		qavapanghitem sulaawiiq \'91he felt fatigued from lack of sleep\'92; qepghaqani sulaawinapiggniiqaa uqigtuqameng kevaghqu \'91he says his job made him fatigued from lifting things\'92; sulaawiyami meghnaaliiq \'91when he got tired, he rested\'92	tired (get ~)												to be fatigued from lack of rest or from strenuous work; to get tired		from Chukchi ?	x	CK A & W 113		sulawi-	sulxwi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1080 -\
Sulaay	C/k6q	Independence Day (4th of July)															Independence Day (4th of July)		from English \'91July\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 161		sulay	sulxy	\uc0\u1057 \u1102 \u1083 \u257 \u1253 \
sulemsa	c/ksvcz	elderly disabled person		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 elderly disabled person	ghtcnfhtksq ytnheljcj,ysq xtkjdtr			CK Rub 464		sulemsa	sulemsa	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1099 \u1084 \u1089 \u1103 \
sulleve-	c/k]sds-	tear further		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 sumlleghaghte-; qulliraaghem segesqwan piillgha wata sullevuq \'91the tear on the pants knee is getting ever larger\'92	unravel	undone (come ~ at seam)											to tear further; to unravel; to come undone at seam				CK V & E 178		sulleve-	sulleve-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
sullevneghhalek	c/k]sdys5fksr	so inconsiderate!			inconsiderate (so ~!)												so inconsiderate!		< sullevneq-ghhalek				sullevneghhalek	sullevneghhalek	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
sullevneq	c/k]sdys2	mischievous person		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sulleve-	hurts (one who ~ others through sorcery)	sorcery (one who hurts others through ~)								inconsiderate person			mischievous person; one who hurts others through sorcery; inconsiderate person						sullevneq	sullevneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
sullevniqe-	c/k]sdyb2s-	mischievous (be ~)			destructive (be ~)												to be mischievous; to be destructive		< sullevneq-liqe-				sullevniqe-	sullevniqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
sulughhaghte-	c/k/5f5ns-	whip															to whip						sulughhaghte-	sulughhaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1102 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sulugtagh-	c/k/[nf4-	wind howls (especially blowing through cracks)		sulugtaghtuq \'91the wind howled (through the cracks)\'92	howls (wind ~)												for wind to howl (especially blowing through cracks)		< suluk-tagh\super 2\nosupersub -				sulugtagh-	sulugtagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
suluk	c/k/r	sound of wind			noise of wind	wind sound											sound or noise of wind (blowing through cracks)	iev dtnhf	PE culu! (?)		CK V & E 133 (Russ voc)		suluk	suluk	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \
sulungaq	c/k/3f2	crest on auklet		
\f2\i used for parka decoration													
\f0\i0 crest on auklet		PE culu!				sulungaq	sulungaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b suma\super e\nosupersub , sumeq	
\f0\b0 c/vf\super s\nosupersub . cevs2	thought		sumemni \'91in my thinking\'92	idea												idea; thought		cf. PI icuma(-) \'91think; mind\'92 (perhaps should be PE to include this)				sumae; sumeq	sumae; sumeq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 , \u1089 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1179 \
Sumeghaat	Cevs46n	Soomeghat Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Soomeghat Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.						Sumeghat	Sumeghxt	\uc0\u1057 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \
sumeghiighte-	c/vs475ns-	worry		sumeghiightuq \'91he is worried\'92 /													to worry		 < sumeq-?-				sumeghighte-	sumeghxghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sumeghmike-	c/vs4vbrs-	think about		sumeghmikaa \'91he has it on his mind, in his thoughts\'92 /	have on (it) one\'92s mind												to think about; to have (it) on one's mind		< sumeq-mik-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				sumeghmike-	sumeghmike-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
sumeghmiqe-	c/vs4vb2s-	worry (cause (him) to ~)															to cause (him) to worry		< sumeq-miqe-		VK\'92s notes		sumeghmiqe-	sumeghmiqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
sumeghneq	c/vs4ys2	thought			idea												thought; idea		< sumeq-neq\super ?				\nosupersub sumeghneq	sumeghneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
sumeghniqe-	c/vs4yb2s-	think about something		sumeghniquq \'91he thought and thought about something\'92 /	figure out (try to ~ something)												to think about something; to try to figure something out		< sumeghneq-liqe-		CK V & E 146  (comprehend), VK		sumeghniqe-	sumeghniqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
sumeghtaghagh-	c/vs5nf4f4-	think		sumeghtaghaghtuq \'91he thought\'92 / sumeghtaghaatkaa \'91he thought about it\'92; sameng sumeghtaghaghaqsin? \'91what are you thinking (about)?\'92; sumeghtaghaghaqunga pinighniluku \'91I think it is good\'92													to think		< sumeq-?-				sumeghtaghagh-	sumeghtaghagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sumeghte-	c/vs5ns-	worry		sumeghtuq \'91he is worried\'92, \'91he is trying to decide\'92 / suumghutkaa \'91he is concerned about it, thinking seriously concerning it\'92; sumeghtuq kiikun Sivuqaghhnaluni \'91she though seriously about going to Gambell this coming summer\'92	concerned (be ~)	plan to do something about the object of one's worry								decide (try to ~)			to worry; to be concerned; to plan to do something about the object of one's worry; to try to decide		PYK-S cum03(te)-; < sumeq-?-				sumeghte-	sumeghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sumeghyali-	c/vs4mzkb-	mind (have a lot on one\'92s ~)		sumeghyaliiq \'91he has a lot on his mind\'92, \'91he is worrying\'92 / sumeghyalitkaa \'91he is seriously thinking about it\'92	worry												to have a lot on one's mind; to worry		< sumeq-?-				sumeghyali-	sumeghyali-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1083 \u1080 -\
sumlleghaghte-	c/vk]s4f5ns-	split (especially along a seam)		sumlleghaghtuq \'91it split\'92; sumlleghaghtaa \'91he split it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 sulleve-													to split (especially along a seam)						sumlleghaghte-	sumlleghaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b suna\super 1\nosupersub , sunami	
\f0\b0 c/yf\super \'a1\nosupersub . c/yfvb	suddenly		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  iiskughtaqaghut kaatelgheghqaa sunami taana aliighwaaghta aagken \'91we were watching for his arrival when suddenly we saw him coming from the other direction\'92; Aghnaghaghhaq mengteghami iitughumalmaluku 
\f2\i suna
\f0\i0  iitghaghsimalghii qawaamsighaq. \'91When the little girl was inside the house, 
\f2\i unexepectedly
\f0\i0  a little birdie suddenly came in.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 29)	unexpectedly												suddenly; unexpectedly		PE cu(na)				suna1, sunami	suna1, sunami	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 1, \u1089 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1084 \u1080 \

\f1\b suna\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c/yf\'99	soil		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nuna; Aaneqeghlluni, aglaamaluni riigteminun, aqsamuggaa 
\f2\i sunam
\f0\i0  nevegllagumakanga. \'91After he suddenly went out, while he was going home to his den, the 
\f2\i soil
\f0\i0  clung in a major way to his little belly.\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG.  13)	dirt (soil)	earth											soil; dirt; earth						suna2	suna2	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 2\
sunanguq	c/yf3e2	hope so		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 I hope so		< suna\super 1\nosupersub -nguq				sunanguq	sunanguq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
sungaghaghqwaa-	c/3f4f5216-	blush															to blush		PY-S cu&a3-				sungaghaghqwa-	sungaghaghqwx-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 -\
sungaghate-	c/3f4fns-	rosy-cheeked (be ~)															to be rosy-cheeked		PY-S cu&a3-				sungaghate-	sungaghate-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sungaghni	c/3f4yb	bitter taste															bitter taste		< sungaq-ni\super 2		\nosupersub VK		sungaghni	sungaghni	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \
sungaghteqe-	c/3f5ns2s-	redden from embaressment, rage, or exertion		sungaghtequq \'91he became red\'92 / sungaghteqestaa \'91he made her get red with embaressment or rage\'92; usuqluku sungaghteqestaa \'91he got her red by praising her\'92													to redden from embaressment, rage, or exertion		PY-S cu&a3-; < sungaq-?-				sungaghteqe-	sungaghteqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
sungaghwaaq	c/3f4162	breastbone		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sungaq													breastbone						sungaghwaq	sungaghwxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
sungaghyaak	c/3f4m9r	greenish color or thing			bluish color or thing												greenish or bluish color or thing		< sungaq-?-				sungaghyak	sungaghyxk	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
sungaghyug-	c/3f4m/u-	bluish (be ~ or greenish in color)			greenish (be bluish or ~ in color)												to be bluish or greenish in color		< sungag-yug-				sungaghyug-	sungaghyug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
sungaghyuk	c/3f4m/r	blue color or thing			green color or thing												blue color or thing; green color or thing		< sungag-?-				sungaghyuk	sungaghyuk	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
sungaghyukegte-	c/3f4m/rs[ns-	blue (be bright ~)			green (be bright ~)												to be bright blue or green		< sungaghyuk-kegte-				sungaghyukegte-	sungaghyukegte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sungalghutaq	c/3fk4enf2	bead container		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 sungalghutak
\f2\i , for one bead container													
\f0\i0 bead container		< sungaq-lghutaq				sungalghutaq	sungalghutaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
sungamteqe-	c/3fvns2s-	redden from embaressment, rage, or exertion		kayngumiqluni sungamtequq \'91she became red from embarassment\'92 													to redden from embaressment, rage, or exertion		PY-S cu&a3-; < sungaq-?-		VK\'92s notes		sungamteqe-	sungamteqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
sungaq*	c/3f2	bile		
\f2\i probably originally
\f0\i0  bile, 
\f2\i with the
\f0\i0  bead 
\f2\i meaning coming from the bluish color of (early) trade beads;
\f0\i0  sungaanka \'91my beaded necklace\'92	bead	necklace, beaded											bile; bead; beaded necklace		PE cu&a(3)				sungaq*	sungaq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \
sungaqeltaghaq	c/3f2sk]nf4f2	shot (as used in shotgun)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 bead, small												shot (as used in shotgun); small bead		< sungaq-ngestaq		CK Rub 467		sungaqeltaghaq	sungaqeltaghaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
sungghanagh-	c/34fyf4-	fast (do things ~)		sungghanalghiit yuget qepghaghtet pinilghiit \'91people who work fast are good\'92; qikmiinguq sivukluni sungghanaghqwaaluni suumumalghii \'91his dog first became frenetic, and then it got rabid\'92	frenetic (be ~)												to do things fast; to be frenetic				CK A & W 113		sungghanagh-	sungghanagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sungghanagh-	c/34fyf4-	energy (be full of ~)		Qiinghaghsalghiimi imani 
\f2\i sungghanaghtuq
\f0\i0  "Aglaghtuunnaqukut!" \'91When he looked in he was 
\f2\i jaunty
\f0\i0  (saying), \'93We\'92re going home!\'94 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:42); sungghaniquq \'91he\'92s acting (or acted) energetically\'92	excited and ready to act (be ~)												to be full of energy; to be excited and ready to act				VK		sungghanagh-	sungghanagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
sungghanaq	c/34fyf2	active person			energetic person												active, energetic person				VK		sungghanaq	sungghanaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
sunggharuug-	c/34fh8u-	active (become very ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sungghanagh-													to become very active				VK		sunggharug-	sunggharxg-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1271 \u1072 \u1088 \u1263 \u1075 -\
sungite-	c/3bns-	bitter (feel ~ (including both emotionally and physically as when one tastes something bitter))															to feel bitter (including both emotionally and physically as when one tastes something bitter)		PY-S cu&it0-				sungite-	sungite-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
sunglug-	c/3k/u-	fold or bend in as in forming an indentation		sunglugtuq \'91it folded in\'92, \'91it caved in\'92 / sunglugtaa \'91he folded or bent it in\'92; sunglugtestaa \'91he made it fold or bend in\'92	cave in												to fold or bend in as in forming an indentation; to cave in						sunglug-	sunglug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -\

\f1\b sungyuk\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c/3m/r\super \'a1	\nosupersub noise of wind or water			sound of wind or water	roaring sound								whistling sound made by one breathing loudly in sleep			noise or sound of wind or water; roaring sound; whistling sound made by one breathing loudly in sleep				gloss, 2, 3 and 4 from CK Rub 467		sungyuk1	sungyuk1	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 1\

\f1\b sungyuk\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c/3m/r\super \'99	\nosupersub wake left on surface of water		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 wake left on surface of water				CK Rub 467		sungyuk2	sungyuk2	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 2\
supag-	c/gfu-	tilted		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0 mayughaatak supagmun ayaqighllutek ayuquk \'91the ladder is slanted against something\'92; naparakeggtepigtuk yeghrat supagtaghaghqek \'91it is too vertical, you should put it more at an angle\'92	slanted	leaning							check to see if this is really a postural root	angle (at an angle)			tilted; slanted; leaning; at an angle		cf. PE cupi!-		CK A & W 113		supag-	supag-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
supaqak	c/gf2fr	pants of reindeer skin with the fur out		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); this is a dual; the singular would be 
\f0\i0 supuqaq													pants of reindeer skin with the fur out				CK Rub 467		supaqak	supaqak	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \
supe-	c/gs-			
\f2\i root; 
\f0\i0 > suupe-, supelghaq, supugh-, supuk															PE cup0-				supe-	supe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1099 -\
supeg-	c/gsu-	shoot repeatedly		nunavaget kaalluki supegyaqmegteki nutem qafsinat unegtiit \'91they got to a herd of walrus on the ice and left a few of them when they shot repeatedly at them\'92; ilangita angyat suupgitgun ateghaatut \'91even though the other boat shot repeatedly at them, they all got away\'92													to shoot repeatedly				CK A & W 114		supeg-	supeg-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 -\
supelghagh-	c/gsk4f4-	dry partially in the breeze		supelghaghtuq \'91it is drying, or it dried, in the breeze\'92; supelghaghaa \'91it (wind) is drying it, or dried, it\'92 /	air out												to partially dry in the breeze; air out		< supe-?-				supelghagh-	supelghagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
supelghaq	c/gsk4f2	breeze															breeze		< supe-?				supelghaq	supelghaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
supug-	c/geu-	drafty (be ~)															to be drafty		< supe-?-				supug-	supug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1091 \u1075 -\
supugh-	c/ge4-	blow repeatedly or constantly															to blow repeatedly or constantly		< supe-ugh-				supugh-	supugh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 -\
supughaate-	c/ge46ns-	blow away a hurt		
\f2\i when a child (especially) gets hurt, an adult may inhale the \'93hurt\'94 and blow it out into the air saying
\f0\i0  \'91ufaay\'92; tagi supughaallakun \'91come, let me blow it (the hurt) away\'92													to blow away a hurt		< supugh-?-(u)te-		CK A & W 114		supughate-	supughxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
supughragh-	c/ge4hf4-	blow repeatedly															to blow repeatedly		< supugh-ragh-				supughragh-	supughragh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
supughraq	c/ge4hf2	harmonica		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  supughrak, 
\f2\i for one harmonica													
\f0\i0 harmonica		< supugh-ragh-				supughraq	supughraq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
supuk	c/ger	draft (as of cold air)															draft (as of cold air)		< supe-?				supuk	supuk	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1087 \u1091 \u1082 \
suqaghnalke-	c/2f4yfk]rs-	run over with a sled															to run over with a sled		< suqaq-?-				suqaghnalke-	suqaghnalke-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1099 -\
suqaghneghqaq	c/2f4ys52f2	baleen sled runner material			sled runner material	runner material for a sled											sled runner material, traditionally baleen (also walrus tusk or hardwood)		< suqaghneq-kaq				suqaghneghqaq	suqaghneghqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
suqaghneq	c/2f4ys2	sled runner base			base of runner for sled												sled runner base		< suqaq-neq\super ?\nosupersub  (?)				suqaghneq	suqaghneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
suqaq*	c/2f2	baleen		Tamaani salin qawaagniighusiq allgeghlaallghilluku neghighluku tamakut atughaqegkangit negaghat, 
\f2\i suqaghmeng
\f0\i0  ulimaaghet metghaghmun atut. \'91At that time there weren\'92t many shotguns around so they\'92d use snares made of 
\f2\i baleen
\f0\i0  to catch eiders.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:140); Tamaani pingwaaghhiinaat aklungillghi \'85 America-m angyaghpaganeng tukfighikayuget, 
\f2\i suqaghmeng
\f0\i0 , tugutmeng kaanneghata tespamavek. \'91At that time only the well to do were able to carry on trade in 
\f2\i baleen
\f0\i0  and ivory with American ships whenever they  came.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:200); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  suughqaq													baleen		PE cuqqa3				suqaq*	suqaq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
suqi-	c/2b-	remove the baleen from a whale		salin suqingigataat \'91they haven\'92t removed the baleen yet\'92; suqiluteng nengiitut \'91they took off the baleen and divided everything among the crews\'92													to remove the baleen from a whale		< suqaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -		CK A & W 114, VK		suqi-	suqi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1080 -\
Suqitughnak	C/2bne4yfr	river that flows out near Qitnegaq Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 river that flows out near Qitnegaq Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Suqitughnak	Suqitughnak	\uc0\u1057 \u1102 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
suqlak	c/2k]zr	bistort		
\f2\i refers especially to the edible root	
\f0\i0 Alpine bistort	pink plumes							in Rub 464, it says that it is a narrow hollow projection on mountain from the summit to the foot ???	
\f2\i Polygonum viviparum or Polygonum bistorta ellipticum			
\f0\i0 Alpine bistort
\f2\i  (Polygonum viviparum) 
\f0\i0 ; pink plumes 
\f2\i (Polygonum bistorta)		
\f0\i0 PE cuqla!				suqlak	suqlak	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
suqlamengestaq	c/2k]zvs3scnf2	pink plumes			bistort	
\f2\i Polygonum bistorta											
\f0\i0 pink plumes or bistort (Polygonum bistorta)		< suqlak-?-ngestaq				suqlamengestaq	suqlamengestaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
suqlawaaq	c/2k]z162	common bistort			bistort, common	
\f2\i Polygonum viviparum L.											
\f0\i0 common bistort 
\f2\i (Polygonum viviparum L.) 		
\f0\i0 < suqlak-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				suqlawaq	suqlawxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
suqlugh-	c/2k]/4-	crumpled		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  suqlughtuq \'91it got bent\'92; suqlughtaa \'91he bent it\'92; suqlughngaaq \'91it is bent\'92; Tamaa copper-et, legan taakwavek 
\f2\i suqlughlluki
\f0\i0 , wayameng sameng, wayaghtuftuqlu copper-meng tamaa. Sufluget taaqiit. \'91There was copper [sheeting] there, and so [they] 
\f2\i bent it around
\f0\i0 , and bound it with some sort of wire, copper wire. They finished the stove pipes [that way].\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)	folded in to narow an opening	bent											crumpled; folded in to narow an opening; bent		PY-S cuqlu3-				suqlugh-	suqlugh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
suqlughneq	c/2k]/4ys2	bend (bent thing or area)															bend (bent thing or area)		< suqlugh-neq\super 2				\nosupersub suqlughneq	suqlughneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
suqluneq	c/2k]/ys2	canyon		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  suqlunghek, 
\f2\i for one canyon or gully; 
\f0\i0 Yataaghqelluni estuyalghiimi anigukun 
\f2\i suqlunghegnekun
\f0\i0  taakwagun meghmun agigngalghiignekun. \'91After getting ready he slid down on the snow down the 
\f2\i gully
\f0\i0  that led to the water.\'92 (KALLAG. 19); = suqlunqaq	gully												canyon; gully		< suqlugh-neq\super ?		\nosupersub suqlunqak in Rub 464		suqluneq	suqluneq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
suqlunqaq	c/2k]/y2f2	canyon		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  suqlunqak, 
\f2\i for one canyon or gully; 
\f0\i0 = suqluneq	gully												canyon; gully		suqlugh-neq\super ?\nosupersub -qaq		suqlunqak in Rub 464		suqlunqaq	suqlunqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
suqsuq	c/2c/2	sound or noise of splashing, gurgling, or running water		naaptaq iqalluk suqsughtaghtuq \'91the fish that was caught in the net is splashing around\'92; kiiyeghwaaghem suqsukek nagaqughagka \'91I hear the gurgling of the stream\'92	gurgling sound	splashing sound											sound or noise of splashing or gurgling of water						suqsuq	suqsuq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \
suug-	c0u-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > suuglliqe-, suuglluk; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  yuk													person						sug-	sxg-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1075 -\
suugerngae	c0ush3fs	curtain partitioning off the insulated inner room in traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i made of tanned caribou or reindeer hide													
\f0\i0 curtain partitioning off the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0  (q.v.), the insulated inner room in the 
\f2\i mangteghapik 
\f0\i0 (q.v.), the traditional dome-shaped house		from Chukchi c\'92ow0r!0n \'91front wall of inner room\'92	14			sugerngae	sxgerngae	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1075 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
suugh-	c04-	murky (be ~)		suughtuq \'91it is murky\'92, \'91it is off white\'92 / suuqan \'91if it is murky\'92	muddy (be ~ (of water))	strong (be ~ (of tea or coffee))								off-white (be ~ in color)			to be murky; to be muddy (of water); to be strong (of tea or coffee); to be off-white in color		PE 0cu3-				sugh-	sxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 -\
suughaq*	c04f2	blueberry			
\f2\i Vaccinium uliginosum												
\f0\i0 blueberry 
\f2\i (Vaccinium uliginosum)		
\f0\i0 PY cu3aq				sughaq*	sxghaq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
suughite-	c04bns-	clear (be ~)			weak (be ~ (of tea))												to be clear; to be weak (of tea)		< suugh-(ng)ite-				sughite-	sxghite-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
suughmelnguq*	c04vsk3e2	muddy water			murky water	cloudy liquid											muddy or murky water; cloudy liquid		< suugh-melnguq				sughmelnguq*	sxghmelnguq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
suughneghiite-	c04ys47n-	turn pale		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)													
\f0\i0 to turn pale	,ktlytn	< suugh-?-		CK V & E 174; Rub 462		sughneghite-	sxghneghxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 -\
suughpagte-	c05gf[ns-	dark or murky (suddenly become ~ (especially of liquid))			color (change ~)	spotted (become ~)								stained (become ~)			to suddenly become dark or murky (especially of liquid); to change color; to became spotted or stained		< suugh-pagte-		gloss 2, 3 and 4: CK Rub 468		sughpagte-	sxghpagte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
suughqaq*	c052f2	baleen (edible cartiledge-like layer at the base of the ~ of the lower jaw near the gums)		Taawa suqaat, \'85.  Akiksaghtughaqeftiit tawaqalegnun. Talwa 
\f2\i suughqalegllaget
\f0\i0 . \'91And baleen, \'85 they evidentally traded them for tobacco. And also there was lots of 
\f2\i baleen \'93oyster\'94
\f0\i0  (for eating).\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:124); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  suqaq	\'93oyster\'94 (so-called) of baleen												edible cartiledge-like layer at the base of the baleen of the lower jaw near the gums; \'93oyster\'94 (so-called) of baleen						sughqaq*	sxghqaq*	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
suughte-	c05ns-	darken		suughtekan \'91if/when it gets murky\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91when it (tea, coffee) gets strong\'92; meghtaghvigem megha suughtaa \'91the well water is getting murky\'92; qateghrakegtak ggaatkek suughtaak \'91her white blouse is getting yellowish\'92; angyam piingha qateghrakegtaq suughtaa \'91the white paint on the boat is getting grayish\'92; uygaaqa suughtaa \'91my bleached seal-skin is becoming off-white\'92	murky (become ~)	off-white (become ~ in color)								strong (get ~ (of tea or coffee))			to darken or become murky; to become off-white in color; to get strong (of tea or coffee)		< suugh-te\super \'a3\nosupersub -				sughte-	sxghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
suughuute-	c048ns-	stir up sediment in a liquid															to stir up sediment in a liquid		< suugh-?-				sughute-	sxghxte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
suuglliqe-	c0[k]b2s-	frustrated (get ~ )			anger (show one\'92s ~)												to get frustrated and show ones anger		< suug-lliqe-				suglliqe-	sxglliqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
suugllug-	c0[k]eu-	bad mood (be in a ~)		mekelghiiq suuglliqelghii igaghvigmeng aanesimakangat \'91they had the boy who was irritable leave the school\'92	angered (be ~)	irritable (be ~)											to be irritable; to be in a bad mood; to get angry easily		< suug-llug- (?)		CK A & W 114		sugllug-	sxgllug-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1091 \u1075 -\
suuglluk	c0[k]/r	frustrated (one who gets ~ )			anger (one who readily shows his ~)	irascible person											one who gets frustrated, angered or offended easily and readily shows his anger; irascible person		< suug-lluk				suglluk	sxglluk	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
suuk	c0r	baleen strap, small, fastened to harpoon		
\f2\i exact identificationundetermined; 
\f0\i0 suuga \'91its strap\'92													small strap of baleen fastened to harpoon				CK Rub 468; VK		suk	sxk	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1082 \
suulqu	c0k]2e	seal type		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined; said to be a small grey ringed seal	
\f0\i0 ring seal type	
\f2\i Phoca hispida 
\f0\i0 (ring seal) type											type of ring seal 
\f2\i (Phoca hispida)				
\f0\i0 CK Rub 465		sulqu	sxlqu	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \
suulya	c0kmz	soldier															soldier		from English \'91soldier\'92	SLI			sulya	sxlya	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
suuma	c0vf	tobacco of a type brought to Chukotka from Alaska		Akikwaghtaughaqeftiit tawaqalegnun. Talwa suughqalegllaget.  Pedersen nangllegtaghaqelghii. 
\f2\i Suuma
\f0\i0  ataasiq, 
\f2\i suumangwaaqut
\f0\i0  12 pound-net qantaqat, tawaqat 
\f2\i suumanguniiqiit
\f0\i0 . \'91They were coming out to trade baleen for tobacco. Since Pedersen was a kind man, he gave them one twelve pound case of 
\f2\i packaged chewing tobacco
\f0\i0 . They called the tobaco 
\f2\i \'93suuma\'94
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:124)													tobacco of a type brought to Chukotka from Alaska		perhaps from an English (American) brandname	Chuk.	CK Rub 465		suma	sxma	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1084 \u1072 \
suume-	c0vs-	rabid (be ~)		suumuq \'91he or it is berserk\'92 / suumestaa \'91it made him act wild\'92	drunk (be ~)	berserk (go ~)								trance (be in a ~)			to be rabid; to be drunk; to go berserk; to be in a trance (shaman); to act wild		PE cumi!- (?)				sume-	sxme-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1084 \u1099 -\
suumegkaq	c0vs[rf2	rabid animal															rabid animal		< suume-(g)kaq				sumegkaq	sxmegkaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1084 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
suumqaq	c0v2f2	thought (object of ~)		suumqaqamken \'91I am now thinking about you\'92, \'91I have you on my mind\'92; nengiiskufsi suumqennaaghaghpesinga nengilgutngulunga \'91if you don\'92t have a place to stay, think about me and remember that you can stay with me\'92	memory (object of ~)												something suddenly thought about; object of thought or memory		< sumeq-(e)kaq				sumqaq	sxmqaq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1084 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
suumqi-	c0v2b-	remember		ilangi yugem ilameggnun suumqineghtuqat \'91some people are considerate of others\'92	considerate (be ~)	keep in mind											to remember; to be considerate; to keep in mind		< suumqaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -		CK A & W 115		sumqi-	sxmqi-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1084 \u1179 \u1080 -\

\f1\b suupa\super e1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c0gf\super s\'a1	\nosupersub soap		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 soap		from English \'91soap\'92	SLI Chuk.	R467, V&E85		supae1	sxpae1	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1087 \u1072 \u1099 1\

\f1\b suupa\super e2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub c0gfs\'99	soup		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka (though maybe from Russian there); 
\f0\i0 Naanga quyngimeng 
\f2\i suupeliighaqeftuq
\f0\i0  neqekrangllaamaghmi 
\f2\i suupeliightuusighqameng
\f0\i0 . \'91His mother was making reindeer 
\f2\i stew
\f0\i0  while she was making fried bread so that they could have the 
\f2\i stew
\f0\i0  to eat.\'92 (KALLAG. 74)													soup; stew		from English \'91soup\'92	SLI Chuk.			supae2	sxpae2	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1087 \u1072 \u1099 2\
suupe-	c0gs-	blow		suupuq \'91he or it blew\'92; suupaa \'91he or it blew on it\'92 /													to blow		< supe-				supe-	sxpe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1087 \u1099 -\
suupeliiq	c0gsk72	soup															soup		< suupa\super 2\nosupersub -li-aq				supeliq	sxpelxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1251 \u1179 \
suupeqe-	c0gs2s-	soap up		suupequq \'91he lathered up\'92; suupeqaa \'91he lathered it up\'92 /	lather up												to soap up; to lather up		< suupa\super 1\nosupersub -?-				supeqe-	sxpeqe-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
suupgaghte-	c0g[f5ns-	change direction suddenly when fleeing		kaviiq malighqaghluku suupgaghtaakun tugaa \'91he chased after the fox and he caught it in spite of it\'92s changing direction\'92; yugem umyugagni upupeng suupgaghtestaak Nome-emun pifqaami pinaluni \'91the man finally changed his mind about going to Nome\'92	change one\'92s mind												to change direction suddenly when fleeing; to change one\'92s mind				CK A & W 115		supgaghte-	sxpgaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1087 \u1093 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
suupute-	c0gens-	exhale blood when caught (of sea mammal)		aghveghteng paamkaqum tagtalangani suuputestaat \'91while shooting bombs at the whale, it started spurting blood as it exhaled\'92; ayveq malighqughluku suupusan naghullgaat \'91they went after a walrus, and when it spurted blood, they harpooned it\'92													to exhale blood when caught (of sea mammal)		< supe-(u)te-		CK A & W 115 CK		supute-	sxpute-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
suuq	c02	murky liquid		imighaa suughmeng \'91he put murky liquid (strong tea or the like) into it\'92; suughmeng qayughnaqunga \'91I am going to drink strong tea\'92	strong tea												murky liquid; strong tea						suq	sxq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1179 \
suuygute-	c0quens-	splash on the water with something to try induce game to come to the surface		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to splash on the water with something to try induce game to come to the surface				CK Rub 463		suygute-	sxygute-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
suvaaghwagh-	c/d614f4-	continue (excessively) in the same mood		sakraaluni paninang suvaaghwaghaquq \'91he got angry, and is continuing on in the same mood\'92													to continue (excessively) in the same mood				CK A & W 115		suvaghwagh-	suvxghwagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1074 \u257 \u1265 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
suvate-	c/dfns-	gossip		aksaqluku ungipaq qaga kitum suvasimaa \'91someone secretly spread the news out there\'92; ungipaq qaga suvataqaat yakughnalghii \'91they are spreading the dangerous news out there\'92	spread news												to gossip; to spread news				CK A & W 115		suvate-	suvate-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1074 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
suvinagh-	c/dbyf4-	prickly (be ~)		suvinaghtuq \'91it is rough\'92 /	rough (be ~ to the touch)	coarse (be ~ to the touch)											to be prickly, rough, or coarse to the touch						suvinagh-	suvinagh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
suyaghnanigh-	c/z4yfyb4-	run out of energy for moving on															to run out of energy for moving on				VK		suyaghnanigh-	suyaghnanigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1103 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
suyaqnanigh-	c/z2y]fyb4-	lose the desire to do something on account of fatigue		suyiighem tagtalangani qenwat suyaqnaniimalghii \'91barely moving, he finally got so tired he didn\'92t want to continue\'92; kaviiq malighqughluku tagtalmi meghughyalghiimi suyaqnanightuq \'91he chased after the fox and during that, when it got tired it gave up\'92													to lose the desire to do something on account of fatigue				CK A & W 115		suyaqnanigh-	suyaqnanigh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1103 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
suyeq	c/qs2	slapping sound			sound of hard slapping												hard slapping sound						suyeq	suyeq	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1253 \u1099 \u1179 \
suyiigh-	c/q74-	barely moving on account of a rough surface, tiredness, etc. (be ~)		akmagluni quulmun suyiighaqeftuq \'91he was barely going up carrying a pack\'92; suyiighumaluku naghughsimakanga \'91he passed him while he was barely going\'92													to be barely moving on account of a rough surface, tiredness, etc.				CK A & W 115		suyigh-	suyxgh-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1253 \u1251 \u1271 -\
suyvaghte-	c/qdf5ns-	get much or many or more than enough		suyvaghtuq \'91he got a lot\'92 / suyvaghutkaa \'91he got a lot of it\'92	much (get ~)	many (get ~)								more than enough (get ~)			to get much or many; to get more than enough						suyvaghte-	suyvaghte-	\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
taagaq	n6uf2	pebble		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E); cf. 
\f0\i0 taapak													pebble	ufkmrf	PE tuvaq		CK V & E 43		tagaq	txgaq	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
taaghqe-	n652s-	injured on the head (get ~)		taghnughhaat milughmigullghiit ilayeng taaghqumaat uyghagmeng milughluku naasqwakun \'91when the children were throwing rocks at each other, one got injured on the head when his head was targeted with a rock\'92													to get injured on the head				CK A & W 116		taghqe-	txghqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
taaghta	n65nf	doctor, medical		
\f2\i base is
\f0\i0  taaghta-: taaghtat \'91doctors\'92; 
\f2\i also used in Chukotka; 
\f0\i0 Maaten quyngit 
\f2\i taaghtalghuut
\f0\i0 . Ellngan aghalighaqii aqnilghiit quyngit. \'85 Quyngim 
\f2\i taaghtanga
\f0\i0  kayusighaqaat quyngighqwaaghtet. \'91Nowadays the reindeer have a 
\f2\i doctor
\f0\i0 . He gives medicine to the sick reindeer. \'85 The herders help the reindeer 
\f2\i doctor
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AANGHHAQ 77)  													medical doctor		from English \'91doctor\'92	SLI Chuk.	V&E100, R499		taghta	txghta	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
taagkaghtaq	nf[rf5nf2	ancient															ancient	lhtdybq	< taagken-?		CK V & E 130; Rub 497 CK 		tagkaghtaq	txgkaghtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
taagken	n6[rsy	from there		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Kaalluni, iitghumalghii. Iteghyalghiimi unangumalghii. 
\f2\i Taagken
\f0\i0  yugem nuliini tuqluumakanga, "Neghsaq taawa!" \'91He arrived and came in. When he came evidentally he\'92d caught a seal. 
\f2\i And then
\f0\i0  the man called to his wife, \'93I got a seal!\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 9)	and then	so								consequently			from there; and then; then; so; consequently	pfntv. gjnjv\\ njulf	PE ta!\super w\nosupersub ak0n (under PE ta9va); < taagna-
\f2\i modalis		
\f0\i0 CK V & E 125 (Russ voc)		tagken	txgken	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1093 \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \
taagna	n6uyf			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 aagna																			tagna	txgna	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
taagra	n6uhf	celebration of some sort		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 celebration of some sort						tagra	txgra	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \
taake-	n6rs-	long (be ~ (in space or time))		taakuq \'91it is long\'92 / taakluku \'91doing  it for a long time\'92; iknaqegkaq taakluku tamaana ilannaqenghitatgu(u)? are they going to count in that one who has been strong for a long time?													to be long (in space or time)		< take-		sentence example from Linda Badten		take-	txke-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1082 \u1099 -\
taakemna	n6rsvyf			
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 akemna																			takemna	txkemna	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
taakwna	n61ry]f			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  uukna																			takwna	txkwna	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1265 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \
taalek	n6ksr	float, first, on whaling gear															first float on whaling gear						talek	txlek	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
taameng	n6vs3	no wonder!		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  aghulaqnaluni pimaaqa, taameng kagpagllak he was thinking of leaving, no wonder he was really packing; tufighnalukek igaqisigka pimaaqegkek taameng qiliiqnilikek he was thinking of buying my camera, no wonder he said he liked it\'92	so that\'92s why!												no wonder!; so that's why!		< taana-
\f2\i ablative-modalis				
\f0\i0 tameng	txmeng	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1084 \u1099 \u1187 \
taamna	n6vyf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  aamna																			tamna	txmna	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
taan\'92gani	n6yufyb	ocean (out in the ~)		qageghtaa taan'ga meq \'91the sea out there has become rough with whitecaps\'92; 
\f2\i Taan'gavek
\f0\i0  ivenrughtukut elngaatall malghugneghuluta. \'91We went in two [boats] 
\f2\i out to sea
\f0\i0  using outboard motors.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:116)	down there												out in the ocean; down there		
\f2\i this word is the anaphoric adverb from the demonstrative pronoun 
\f0\i0 unegna				tan\'92gani	txn\'92gani	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1085 \u1075 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
taana	n6yf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  una																			tana	txna	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1085 \u1072 \
taane-	n6ys-	scrub		taanuq \'91he scrubbed himself or scrubbed something\'92; taanaa \'91he scrubbed it / taaniiq \'91he scrubbed something\'92													to scrub		PE tan0!-				tane-	txne-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1085 \u1099 -\
taanegna	n6ysuyf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0 unegna																			tanegna	txnegna	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
taapak, taapagaq	n6gfr. n6gfuf2	gravel (piece of ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  taagaq	pebble												piece of gravel; pebble		PE tuvapa!				tapak, tapagaq	txpak, txpagaq	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 , \u1090 \u257 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
taape-	n6gs-	seep through		taapaa \'91it (liquid) is seeping through\'92 /													to seep through		< tape-				tape-	txpe-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1087 \u1099 -\
taapngig-	n6g3]bu-	easily soak up liquid		qaligni taapngighqwaamaniiqaak \'91he says his raincoat is not easily soaked\'92; qiipagham ilangi taapngigaqluteng ilameggneng ayuqut \'91some cloth is less easily soaked than others\'92	absorbent (be ~)												to easily soak up liquid; absorbent				CK A & W 116		tapngig-	txpngig-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1087 \u1187 \u1100 \u1080 \u1075 -\
taapute-	n6gens-	seep through		taaputuq \'91it (liquid) is seeping through\'92													to seep through		< taape-(u)te-				tapute-	txpute-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
taaqe-	n62s-	finish		taaquq \'91he finished\'92; taaqaa \'91he finished it\'92 / Igaghyallghitunga. Sivuqami one-year igaghyaqaghlunga 
\f2\i taaqegkaagunga
\f0\i0 .
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 \'91I didn\'92t go to school (much). In Gambell I did 
\f2\i finish
\f0\i0  one year of school.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:48); 
\f2\i used in connection with a verb expanded by the postbase
\f0\i0  -neq\super 1\nosupersub , 
\f2\i to mean
\f0\i0  \'91when he, you, we, etc., finish V-ing\'92, 
\f2\i that is,
\f0\i0  \'91after V-ing\'92; 
\f2\i examples:
\f0\i0  Neneghmeng 
\f2\i taaqsan
\f0\i0  nulighha allighimalghii nutaghaastaghhiinaghmeng. Allighineghmeng 
\f2\i taaqsan
\f0\i0  ingaghqulluteng qavaasimalghiit. '
\f2\i After (he finished)
\f0\i0  eating, his wife lay out only new mattresses. 
\f2\i After (she finished)
\f0\i0  laying out the mattresses, they slept.' (UNGIPAGHAGH. 14); Taagken tawaten piluguneghmeng 
\f2\i taaqluni
\f0\i0  yataaghqelluni aanuq, esnamun atghaghtuq. 'Then 
\f2\i after (he finished)
\f0\i0 \ul  \ulnone getting dressed he got ready and then went out, and he went down to the shore.' (AYUM. UNGIP. I:14); Neneghmeng 
\f2\i taaqegkumta
\f0\i0  ingaghquullghaakut. '
\f2\i After (we finish)
\f0\i0  eating, let's go to bed.' (UNGIPAGHAGH. 4); Gaaghniineghmeng 
\f2\i taaqneghmini
\f0\i0  neghluni neneghmeng 
\f2\i taaqneghmini
\f0\i0  ingliighluni qavaghaqelghii. \'91When he 
\f2\i finished
\f0\i0  cooking he ate, and when he 
\f2\i finished
\f0\i0  eating he prepared his bedding and slept.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 178)	quit												to finish; to quit		< taqe-				taqe-	txqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 -\
taaqegkaq	n62s[rf2	finished product															finished product		< taaqe-(g)kaq				taqegkaq	txqegkaq	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
taaqiinagh-	n627yf4-	do in abundance		
\f2\i used in the subordinative; 
\f0\i0 nuliighhan qaltagnekun iqalluni sighlatkumakanga taaqiinaghluku \'91his wife got an abundance of fish in the bucket\'92	do enough												to do in abundance; to do enough	dljdjkm\\ ljcnfnjxyj			CK Rub 487		taqinagh-	txqxnagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
taaqriite-	n62i7ns-	colored (be brightly or dark ~ and stand out from background)		
\f2\i especially against a white background	
\f0\i0 stand out from background due to bright or dark coloration												to be brightly or dark colored and stand out from background						taqrite-	txqrxte-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1179 \u1096 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
taaqurragkiigh-	n62eif[r74-	complete tasks right away															to complete tasks right away		< taaqe-ugh-?-ragkiigh-				taqurragkigh-	txqurragkxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1096 \u1072 \u1093 \u1082 \u1251 \u1271 -\
taatget	n6n[sn	intersection of poles at top of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i this is a plural; the singular would be 
\f0\i0 tatek													intersection of poles at top of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< tatek-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 tatget	txtget	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1093 \u1099 \u1090 \
taatghusiq	n6n5ecb2	brake															brake		< tateghte-siq				tatghusiq	txtghusiq	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
taatkaghte-	n6nrf5ns-	hit on the nose		taatkaghtaa \'91he hit it on the nose\'92 /													to hit on the nose		< tatek-?-				tatkaghte-	txtkaghte-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
taatneq	n6ny]s2	cartilage part of a whale\'92s nose		aghvengneghmeggni taatneghmeng saghnaaqelghiit tangtaqughtughyaghqameng \'91when they get a whale, they collect the cartilage from the nose so they can be eaten as a crunchy food\'92													cartilage part of a whale\'92s nose				CK A & W 116 CK		tatneq	txtneq	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
taatqaghte-	n6n2f5ns-	kill by striking with an object		qawaagtani yaqghighaqaq anaguluku taatqaghsimaa \'91he struck the bird that he had shot on its wing, killing it with a stick\'92; iingtaghyam leghlleghtani taatqaghtameng tuququumakangi \'91the molted geese hunter killed his geese by hitting them\'92													to kill by striking with an object				CK A & W 116		tatqaghte-	txtqaghte-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1090 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
taawa	n61f	here it is!		
\f2\i particle; also used to signal a shift in topic	
\f0\i0 there it is!	ready (it\'92s ~!)											here it is!; there it is!; it's ready!		< awa with prefix ta-				tawa	txwa	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1265 \u1072 \
taawanginaq	n61f3byf2	but		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Nanghiiqunalunga maalghugulutek. 
\f2\i Taawanginaq
\f0\i0  uka tumemi mayughyaghqaq uusqalghii. \'91I\'92m thinking of taking both of you. 
\f2\i But
\f0\i0 , along the way there is a very high obstacle\'92 (SULUWET 42)	and yet	only								however			but; and yet; only; however		< taawa-(ng)inaq				tawanginaq	txwanginaq	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1265 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
taawna	n61yf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0 uugna																			tawna	txwna	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1265 \u1085 \u1072 \
taawra	n61hf	seven (the number ~ in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)		
\f2\i the entire jingle is:
\f0\i0  aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'	counting jingle (the number \'91seven\'92 in a ~ or finger naming jingle for children)	jingle (the number \'91seven\'92 in a counting or finger naming ~ for children)											the number seven (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)						tawra	txwra	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1265 \u1088 \u1072 \
taayug-	n6/u-	hurried		
\f2\i emotional root; 
\f0\i0 taayugyugtuq \'91he feels pressed for time\'92; taayugnaghtuq \'91it causes one to feel pressured\'92	pressed for time												hurried; pressed for time		PE tayu(!)-				tayug-	txyug-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1102 \u1075 -\
taayughqe-	n6/52s-	hurry		taayughquq \'91he is in a hurry\'92 / taayughqutkaa \'91he is hurrying with it\'92													to hurry; to be in hurry		< taayug-?-				tayughqe-	txyughqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u257 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
taflu	nfak]/	handle of drum			drum handle												handle of drum		PE pavlu				taflu	taflu	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
tafsi	nfacb	belt			belt around bottom of walrus skin roof of the traditional dome-shaped house												belt; belt around bottom of walrus skin roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		PE tavci				tafsi	tafsi	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \
tafsi-	nfacb-	put on a belt		tafsiiq \'91he put on a belt\'92; tafsii \'91he put a belt on him\'92 /													to put on a belt						tafsi-	tafsi-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 -\
tafsiin, tafsiita	nfac7y. nfac7nf	strap			hoop of barrel												strap; barrel hoop		< tafsi-?-n				tafsin, tafsita	tafsxn, tafsxta	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1251 \u1085 , \u1090 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \
tafsikwagh-	nfacbn1f4-	belt (use a makeshift ~)		sami taayughqemmi ama avangilngughmi tafsiikwaqiinaq pikayuk \'91when in a rush, or when there is nothing else, on can use a makeshift belt\'92													to use a makeshift belt		< tafsi-?-		CK A & W 117		tafsikwagh-	tafsikwagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tafsimik	nfacbvbr	belt (thing worn on ~)															something kept on the belt such as a knife, tobacco pouch, or amulet		< tafsi-mik		gloss 2: CK Rub 497		tafsimik	tafsimik	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
tafsineq	nfacbys2	small of back (of person)															small of back (of person)		< tafsi-neq\super 2				\nosupersub tafsineq	tafsineq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1092 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tafutaq	nfaenf2	walrus hide doubled in size by splitting															walrus hide doubled in size by splitting		PE tap03(-) (?)				tafutaq	tafutaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1092 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tagh-	nf4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > taghsagh, taghtugh-; = tegh-															PE 0t03-				tagh-	tagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
taghneghaghqugh-	nf4ys4f52e4-	see one's reflection		taghneghaghqughtuq \'91he saw his reflection\'92	reflection (see one\'92s ~)								tagneghaghute- in Rub 483				to see one's reflection		< taghneghaq-?-				taghneghaghqugh-	taghneghaghqugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
taghneghaghquuta	nf4ys4f528nf	mirror		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 taghneghaghquutek
\f2\i , for one mirror; 
\f0\i0 \'85 katam tawatetuq esghalghiistun 
\f2\i taghneghaghquutelugkun
\f0\i0 . \'85 \'91just like seeing with a poor 
\f2\i mirror
\f0\i0  (\'93For now we see through a 
\f2\i glass
\f0\i0 , darkly\'94)\'92 (1 Corinthians 13.12)													mirror		< taghneghaghqugh-(u)ta				taghneghaghquta	taghneghaghqxta	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \
taghneghaq	nf4ys4f2	shadow		
\f2\i also plural, 
\f0\i0 taghneghat, 
\f2\i for one image; cf. 
\f0\i0 taghu	image	reflection								likeness			shadow; image; likeness; reflection		PE ta3(a)n03				taghneghaq	taghneghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
taghnughhaamalleq	nf4ye56vfk]s2	childhood															childhood	ltncndj	< taghnughhaq-(u)ma-lleq		CK Rub 483 CK		taghnughhamalleq	taghnughhxmalleq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u257 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
taghnughhaghwaaq	nf4ye5f4162	doll															doll		< taghnughhaq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				taghnughhaghwaq	taghnughhaghwxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
taghnughhalghutaq	nf4ye5fk4enf2	womb		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 womb	vfnrf	< taghnughhaq-lghutaq		CK Rub 483		taghnughhalghutaq	taghnughhalghutaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
taghnughhalgun	nf4ye5fkuey	child (fellow ~) within a group of children															fellow child within a group of children	ltndjhf\\ uheggf ltntq	< taghnughaq-lgun		CK Rub 483 CK 		taghnughhalgun	taghnughhalgun	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
taghnughhaq*	nf4ye5f2	child		taghnughhaat naghaaghaqut eslami \'91the children are playing outside\'92; Aakaqa unaaq 
\f2\i taghnughhangumaaq
\f0\i0 . \'91My older sister had a 
\f2\i baby
\f0\i0  this morning.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 157); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  taghu	baby												child; baby		PKY-S tan!u3aq				taghnughhaq*	taghnughhaq*	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
taghnughhin	nf4ye5by	tent of canvas fitted on sled to protect children (and mother) when traveling															tent of canvas fitted on sled to protect children (and mother) when traveling		< taghnughhaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -(u)n				taghnughhin	taghnughhin	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1080 \u1085 \
taghnughhiqe-	nf4ye5b2s-	babysit		taghnughhiquq \'91he is babysitting\'92													to babysit		< taghnughhaq-liqe-				taghnughhiqe-	taghnughhiqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
taghpagh-	nf5gf4-	open		
\f2\i applies to holes and other openings and also to flowers;
\f0\i0  taghpaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  taghpaghaa \'91it opened\'92 / taghpaghtaa \'91he opened it more\'92	enlarge												to open; to enlarge		PE ta3pa3-				taghpagh-	taghpagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 -\
taghsagh-	nf5cz4-	awaken (him)		taghsaghaa \'91he woke him up\'92 /	wake (him) up												to awaken (him)		< tagh-sagh-				taghsagh-	taghsagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
taghtugh-	nf5ne4-	wake up		taghtughtuq \'91he woke up\'92 / taghtughtaa \'91he woke her up\'92													to wake up		< tagh-?-				taghtugh-	taghtugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
taghu	nf4e	person		
\f2\i said to be a shaman's word; cf.
\f0\i0  taghneghaq; 
\f2\i see  Bogoraz\'92s comments on this word inBoza 1913:449 	
\f0\i0 man												person; man		PE ta3u				taghu	taghu	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \
taghyughii-	nf4]/47-	swell after contact with salt water (of a cut)		un\'92gum kelliin megha taghyughnilnguq, taghyughiisiqniiqegkangat inghusaq \'91the ocean water is salty, so it is a rule to keep salt water from getting into a cut\'92													to swell after contact with salt water (of a cut)				CK A & W 117		taghyughi-	taghyughx-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u1251 -\
taghyughnite-	nf4m/4ybns-	salty (be ~)															to be salty	cjktysq	< taghyuq-nite-		CK V & E 133 (Russ voc)		taghyughnite-	taghyughnite-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
taghyuq	nf4m/2	salt		\'85 tallimiitangani aghneghan elngaatall nenglun taanesnaken 
\f2\i taghyumeng
\f0\i0 . \'91\'85 every five days scrub your (semi-subterranean) house with 
\f2\i sea water
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:15)	brine	sea or sea water								ocean			salt; brine; sea or sea water; ocean		PE ta3yu3				taghyuq	taghyuq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \
tagi-	nfub-	come (to speaker)		tagiiq \'91he came\'92 / tagitaa \'91he brought it\'92; tagi \'91come here\'92; tagimalghii \'91he has come over here\'92; Maaten ilangani Ungazighmiit 
\f2\i tagimalghiit
\f0\i0  Sivuqamun. \'91One time the Siberians 
\f2\i came
\f0\i0  to St. Lawrence Island.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 41)													to come (to speaker)		PY-S ta!i-				tagi-	tagi-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 -\
tagimun	nfubvey	here (toward ~)		
\f2\i adverbial particle;
\f0\i0  
\f2\i Tagimun
\f0\i0  qikmiik sukeralaataghtut. \'91
\f2\i Coming home 
\f0\i0 their dogs ran faster.\'92 (UNKUS. 15)	coming this way	coming home											toward here; coming this way; coming home		< tagi-
\f2\i terminalis				
\f0\i0 tagimun	tagimun	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
tagisqaghtaq	nfubc2f5nf2	gusty wind		pennat manungitni angyat anuqem tagisqaghtam sakniqesimayaqangi \'91the gusty wind in front of the cliffs made the boat have a difficult time\'92; alpagyalghiimeng  tagisqaghtaq kayaalimalghii \'91when they made it through, the gusts got weak\'92	wind, gusty												gusty wind		< tagi-?-		CK A & W 1117		tagisqaghtaq	tagisqaghtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b tagite-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nfubns-\super \'a1	\nosupersub give (to speaker)
\f2\i (not in the sense of transferring ownership)		
\f0\i0 tagitaa \'91he gave it (to speaker)\'92 / tagitigu \'91give it (to me)\'92													to give (to speaker)
\f2\i (not in the sense of transferring ownership)		
\f0\i0 < tagi-te\super 1\nosupersub -				tagite-1	tagite-1	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub tagite-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nfubns-\super 2	\nosupersub bring (to speaker)		tagitaa \'91he brought it (to speaker)\'92 /													to bring (to speaker)		< tagi-(u)te-				tagite-2	tagite-2	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\u1179 \
tagitiqwaa-	nfubnb216-	lost in the fog		tengegkayuget tagitiqwaaluteng uteghsimaat Nome-emun \'91the airplane wasn\'92t sure where they were in the fog, so they went back to Nome\'92; tagitiqwaalghiit angyat guutaqluteng naalkumakangit \'91the boat was lost, but when they fired a few shots, they found them\'92													to be lost in the fog		< tagituk-?-		CK A & W 117		tagitiqwa-	tagitiqwx-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1080 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 -\
tagitugiiq	nfubneu72	murrelet, Kittlitz\'92s		
\f2\i possibly
\f0\i0  ancient murrelet
\f2\i  (Synthlioboramphus antiquus) instead	Brachyramphus brevirostris	
\f0\i0 Kittlitz\'92s murrelet							identified in SLI Cur. Man. as \'93marbled murrelet\'94, a similar looking species, rarely found in the area				Kittlitz's murrelet 
\f2\i (Brachyramphus brevirostris)		
\f0\i0 PY ta!itu!i(C)aq (under PE ta!0tu!); < tagituk-?				tagitugiq	tagitugxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1251 \u1179 \
tagituk	nfubner	fog															fog		PE ta!0tu!				tagituk	tagituk	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \
tagivagh-	nfubdf4-	give (to speaker)
\f2\i (not in the sense of transferring ownership)		
\f0\i0 tagivaghhu \'91hand it over\'92; tagivaqaghhu \'91please give it to me\'92	hand (to speaker)												to give (to speaker)
\f2\i (not in the sense of transferring ownership)
\f0\i0 ; to hand (to speaker)		< tagi-vagh-				tagivagh-	tagivagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tagiyagh-	nfubz4-	gust of wind															for there to be a gust of wind	gjhsd dtnhf			CK V & E 24; Rub 481		tagiyagh-	tagiyagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1103 \u1271 -\
taglaate-	nfuk9ns-	bring (it) up the slope		ayumiq kiyang kevegluki taglaatkayugit tuqukat \'91long ago they would usually bring the dead to the mountain by carrying them\'92	bring to the mountain for burial												to bring (it) up the slope; to bring to the mountain for burial		< taglagh-(u)te-				taglate-	taglxte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\
taglagh-	nfukz4-	go up from sea to shore or up the shore		taglaghtuq 'he went up' / taglaataa 'he brought it up'; taglaghtaa 'the wind brought it to the shore'; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tagyuqa-	go to Chukotka from St. Lawrence Is.	move inland								wind blows from the southwest			to go up from sea to shore or up the shore; to go to Chukotka from St. Lawrence Is.; for wind to blow from the southwest; to move inland		PE ta!0-		CK (last gloss)		taglagh-	taglagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 -\
taglaghta	nfukz5nf	wind blowing to the shore															wind blowing to the shore		< taglagh-(s)ta				taglaghta	taglaghta	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
taglugute-	nfuk/ubns-	pull up		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  ivaghiniightet taglugusimaat aghveq esnamun \'91the hunters have pulled the whale to the shore\'92	drag up												to pull up; to drag up	gjlzubdfnm	PE ta!0-		CK Rub 481		taglugute-	taglugute-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tagnegh-	nfuys4-	black (be ~)															to be black		PE ta303n03- (under PE ta303(-))				tagnegh-	tagnegh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 -\
tagneghli	nfuys4kb	stone, soft, from Chukotka used to darken sinew so that stitches will blend with dark skin or fabric			graphite												soft black stone from Chukotka used to darken sinew so that stitches will blend with dark skin or fabric; graphite		< tagnegh-?-				tagneghli	tagneghli	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1080 \
tagneghllineq	nfuys5k]bys2	discolored or darkened ice (standing out amid white ice)		
\f2\i see item 78 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004; = tagneghneq	sea ice type												discolored or darkened ice (standing out amid white ice)		< tagnegh-?-neq\super 2				\nosupersub tagneghllineq	tagneghllineq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tagneghneq	nfuys4ys2	discolored or darkened ice (standing out amid white ice)															discolored or darkened ice (standing out amid white ice)		< tagnegh-?-neq\super 2				\nosupersub tagneghneq	tagneghneq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tagneghneq	nfuys4ys2	discolored or darkened ice (standing out amid white ice)		
\f2\i see item 78 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004; = tagneghllineq	sea ice type												discolored or darkened ice (standing out amid white ice)		< tagnegh-neq\super 2				\nosupersub tagneghneq	tagneghneq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tagneghruwaaq	nfuys4he162	Lapland longspur			longspur, Lapland	
\f2\i Calcarius lapponicus											
\f0\i0 Lapland longspur 
\f2\i (Calcarius lapponicus)		
\f0\i0 < tagnegh-ruk-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				tagneghruwaq	tagneghruwxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
tagneghsaasiq 	nfuys4c9cb2	darkening implement or substance such as used in tattooing															darkening implement or substance such as used in tattooing		< tagnegh-sagh-(u)siq				tagneghsasiq 	tagneghsxsiq 	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
tagneghute-	nfuys4ens-	visible (become partially ~ through the darkness) 		tagneghutuq \'91it came into enough light to be seen\'92													to become partially visible through the darkness 		< tagneq-(u)te- (?)				tagneghute-	tagneghute-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tagneghziigute-	nfuys4p7uens-	barely visible		tagitugmi pika naayghaq tagneghziigutuq \'91the mountain is barely visible up there in the fog\'92; tagitugmi alisimaq tagneghziik yuuk \'91a silhouette of a man was visible in the fog\'92													to be barely visible in the dim light		< tagneghziig-(u)te-		CK A & W 117		tagneghzigute-	tagneghzxgute-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1079 \u1251 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tagneghziik	nfuys4p7r	silhouette barely visible in dim light		tagitugmi aliisimaaq tagneghziik yuuk \'91a silhouette of a man was barely visible in the fog\'92; ullghitagma iqeghtakek tagneghziiguuk \'91the color of my snowmachine is dark\'92	dark barely visible thing												silhouette barely visible in dim light; dark barely visible thing		< tagneq-?		CK A & W 117		tagneghzik	tagneghzxk	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1079 \u1251 \u1082 \
tagnemllaaq	nfuysvk]92	darkish thing or color			brown thing or color												darkish thing or color; brown thing or color	cveulsq	< tagnegh-?-		CK V & E 133 (Russ voc)		tagnemllaq	tagnemllxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
tagnemyugaaq	nfuysvm/u62	grey thing															grey thing		< tagnegh-?-				tagnemyugaq	tagnemyugxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 \
tagneneghtaq	nfuysys5nf2	upper part of whale-boat, usually painted dark		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 upper part of whale-boat, usually painted dark	dth[ dtkm,jnf	< tagnegh-neq\super 1\nosupersub -taq\super 1		\nosupersub CK Rub 482		tagneneghtaq	tagneneghtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tagneneq	nfuysys2	pupil of eye															pupil of eye		< tagnegh-neq\super ?				\nosupersub tagneneq	tagneneq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tagneq	nfuys2	black thing or blackness			dark thing or darkness	brown thing or color											black thing or blackness; dark thing or darkness; brown thing or color	xthyjnf	PE ta303n03 (under PE ta303(-))		CK V & E 133 (Russ voc)		tagneq	tagneq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tagneqegtaq	nfuys2s[nf2	black (completely ~ thing)															completely black thing		< tagnegh-kegtaq				tagneqegtaq	tagneqegtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tagneqegte-	nfuys2s[ns-	black (be ~ completely)															to be completely black		< tagnegh-kegte-				tagneqegte-	tagneqegte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tagneqraq	nfuys2if2	dot			dark spot on skin	mole on skin											dot; dark spot on skin; mole on skin		< tagneq-qraq				tagneqraq	tagneqraq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1179 \
tagrapak	nfuhfgfr	common eider		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 eider, common	
\f2\i Somateria mollissima							
\f0\i0 taagra in Rub 483				common eider (Somateria mollissima)						tagrapak	tagrapak	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
tagsigh-	nf[cb4-	beckon		tagsighaa 'he beckoned or called for her to come' / tagsighiiq 'he beckoned or called for someone to come'	call to come												to beckon; to call to come		PE ta!ci3- (under PE ta!0-)				tagsigh-	tagsigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
tagsighaq	nf[cb4f2	rawhide rope cut lengthwise into thinner rope to be used in stretching animal hides to dry		ayumiq tagsighaq uglapestaaq atughniiqaat mangteghameng amighineghmeggni \'91they say they used a whole lot of rawhide rope that has been thinned for lashing drying skins onto a house\'92													rawhide rope cut lengthwise into thinner rope to be used in stretching animal hides to dry				CK A & W 117		tagsighaq	tagsighaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tagsighsaqe-	nf[cb5cz2s-	not come when called			wait to be implored to come												to not come when called; to wait to be implored to come		< tagsigh-?-				tagsighsaqe-	tagsighsaqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tagsiqligh-	nf[cb2k]b4-	invite (him) over for a definite purpose		igaghyat tagsiqlighteghiit saliqughnaluki \'91they invited the students in order to give them things\'92; akmaken tagsiqliimakangat aghviisqelluku \'91they invited him over from the mainland\'92													to invite (him) over for a definite purpose		< tagsigh-?-		CK A & W 117; Rub 498, CK		tagsiqligh-	tagsiqligh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\

\f1\b tagtala, tagtala\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nf[nfkz. nf[nfkz\super s	\nosupersub length in space or time		tagtalanga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tagtalnga \'91its length or duration\'92; tagtalmi \'91after a time\'92; yimiksaghluku tagtalmi gginaghsiit \'91after being shy around him at length they got to know him\'92; igleghtem tagtalangani \'91in the course of his travels\'92; Kiyaghtaallghem 
\f2\i tagtalangani
\f0\i0  aghnaq ighnimalghii mekelghiighhaghmeng. 'In the 
\f2\i course
\f0\i0  of living (there) the woman gave birth to a little boy.' (UNGIPAGH. 134)	distance	course of time											length in space or time; distance; course of time		< take-tala				tagtala, tagtalae	tagtala, tagtalae	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 , \u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
tagtalmi	nf[nfkvb	later on		
\f2\i adverbial particle;
\f0\i0  Enkaam 
\f2\i tagtalmi
\f0\i0  tawaten pangeghhnaqut Sulugenkut. \'91And 
\f2\i later
\f0\i0  Suluk and family were going to visit Chukotka.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:108)													later on		< tagtala-
\f2\i localis				
\f0\i0 tagtalmi	tagtalmi	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1084 \u1080 \
tagugha-	nfue4f-	surf comes in over a low part of the beach		tagughaaq 'the surf is covering the low part of the beach' /													for surf to come in over a low part of the beach						tagugha-	tagugha-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 -\
tagyuqa-	nfum/2f-	come slowly toward the shore (of a boat)		tagyuqaaq 'it is coming to the shore' /													to slowly come toward the shore (of a boat)		< tage-?-				tagyuqa-	tagyuqa-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \u1072 -\

\f1\b takagh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nfrf4-\'a1	crosswise (be ~)			caught in an opening so that it cannot fit through (be ~)												to be crosswise; to be caught in an opening so that it cannot fit through		PY taka3-\super 1				\nosupersub takagh-1	takagh-1	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub takagh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nfrf4-\'99	inhibited		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  takaghyugtuq 'he feels inhibited'; takaqaa 'he feels inhibited, shy and/or respectful towards her'	shy	respectful											inhibited; shy; respectful		PY taka3-\super 2				\nosupersub takagh-2	takagh-2	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub takaghaghquq	nfrf4f52e2	upper part, fancy, of woman\'92s skin-boot		payaaqegni takaghaghquneghmeng taaqaak \'91the woman finished sewing the fancy upper part on her skin boot\'92													fancy upper part of woman\'92s skin-boot				CK A & W 117		takaghaghquq	takaghaghquq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
takaghqughvike-	nfrf52e4dbrs-	cover by putting boards or the like crosswise over (it)		aghnam ayemquulluni, laawaaq takaghqughvikaqaa \'91after the woman broke them (the sticks) to pieces, she put them in a dugout and covered them\'92													to cover by putting boards or the like crosswise over (it)		< takagh\super 1\nosupersub -qugh-vig-ke-				takaghqughvike-	takaghqughvike-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
takaghte-	nfrf5ns-	lean (it) against something		angyam napaqaa angyilghatgun takaghtigu \'91lean the boat\'92s pole against the boat rack\'92													to lean (it) against something		< takagh\super 1\nosupersub -te\super ?\nosupersub -		CK A & W 118		takaghte-	takaghte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
takaghyaq	nfrf4mz2	crosspiece supporting bed of sled or keeping door securely closed		amik takaghyighluku uninnaakesi \'91put a bar across the door and leave\'92; igleghsughngaaghemng sangwaa takaghyaqaat \'91they would be leaving but there\'92s something that\'92s keeping them from going\'92	toggle or button	barrier or obstacle that keeps one from acting as desired								latch for door consisting of small piece of wood pivoting on a nail			crosspiece supporting bed of sled  or keeping door securely closed; toggle; button; latch for door consisting of small piece of wood pivoting on a nail; barrier or obstacle that keeps one from acting as desired		< takagh\super 1\nosupersub -?				takaghyaq	takaghyaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
take-	nfrs-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > tagtala, taake-, takelli-, takelmun, takelriik, takesiq, takestaaq															PE tak0-				take-	take-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
takellengugh-	nfrsk]s3e4-	lose patience		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to lose patience	nthznm nthgtybt			CK Rub 486		takellengugh-	takellengugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\
takelli-	nfrsk]b-	shorten (make shorter)		takellii 'he shortened it' /													to shorten; to make shorter		PE tak0li- (under PE tak0-); < take-(gh/l)i-				takelli-	takelli-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
takelliighagh-	nfrsk]74f4-	shorten (become shorter)		takelliighaghtuq 'it got shorter' / Aghneghet 
\f2\i takelliighaghii
\f0\i0 . \'91The days 
\f2\i are getting shorter
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 14)													to shorten; to become shorter		< take-lliighagh-				takellighagh-	takellxghagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
takelmun	nfrskvey	lengthwise		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 lengthwise		< take-?-
\f2\i terminalis				
\f0\i0 takelmun	takelmun	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
takelriik	nfrskh7r	elongated thing			oblong thing	oval thing											elongated thing; oblong thing; thing		< take-?-				takelrik	takelrxk	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1088 \u1251 \u1082 \
takemriik, takemrewaaq	nfrsvh7r. nfrsvhs162	elongated thing		= takermiik	oblong thing	oval thing											elongated thing; oblong thing; thing		< take-?-				takemrik, takemrewaq	takemrxk, takemrewxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1088 \u1251 \u1082 , \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1088 \u1099 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b takeriik\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nfrsh7r\super \'a1	\nosupersub oblong thing			oval thing	elongated thing											elongated thing; oval thing; oblong thing	ghjljkujdfnsq\\ jdfkmysq	< take-?		CK Rub 486		takerik1	takerxk1	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1251 \u1082 1\

\f1\b takeriik\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nfrsh7r\super \'99	\nosupersub cartridge		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in dual, 
\f0\i0 takeriigek, 
\f2\i for one cartridge													
\f0\i0 cartridge	gfxrf gfnhjyjd	< take-?		CK Rub 486		takerik2	takerxk2	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1251 \u1082 2\
takerkak	nfrsirfr	blue whale			whale (blue ~)	
\f2\i Balaenoptera musculus											
\f0\i0 blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus)		PY tak$u(k)				takerkak	takerkak	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1096 \u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \
takermiik	nfrshv7r	oblong thing		= takemriik	oval thing	elongated thing											oblong thing; oval thing; elongated thing	ghjljkujdfnsq\\ jdfkmysq	< take-?		CK Rub 486		takermik	takermxk	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1084 \u1251 \u1082 \
takesiq	nfrscb2	dog notable for very short or tall stature			person notable for very short or tall stature												dog or person notable for very short or tall stature		< take-?-				takesiq	takesiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
takestaaghhaa-	nfrscn656-	short (be ~)		takestaaghhaaguq 'it is short' / takestaaghhaaga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  takestaaghhaawa? 'is it short?' 
\f2\i (the form with
\f0\i0  w 
\f2\i reveals that this base may still be, as it is historically, underlyingly
\f0\i0  takestaaghhau-)													to be short		< takestaa(ghhaq)-(ng)u-				takestaghha-	takestxghhx-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u257 -\
takestaaghhaq*	nfrscn65f2	short thing															short thing		< takestaaq-ghhaq				takestaghhaq*	takestxghhaq*	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
takestaaq	nfrscn62	short thing															short thing		< take-staaq				takestaq	takestxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
taketuyiig-	nfrsneq7u-	lengthy (be ~)		uyghagek taawa maalghuk, aallgha angqaperugnaaghaq aallgha taketuyiik \'91there are two rocks, the other one is round, and the other is lengthy\'92; qikmiq taana esgha taketuyuuk sangami \'91that dog there, see, is somewhat long; I wonder why\'92													to be lengthy		< take-tu-?-		CK A &  W 118		taketuyig-	taketuyxg-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1253 \u1251 \u1075 -\
Takevaq	Nfrsdf2	Enmelen in Chukotka (well southwest of the Yupik area)		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Enmelen in Chukotka (well southwest of the Yupik area)						Takevaq	Takevaq	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
taki	nfrb	checking on traps or nets		
\f2\i Chuktokan (R);
\f0\i0  taki utkusenun kiyaghtaquq unaangulukunginaghqun \'91he only checks his traps in the mornings\'92; piyaaniightem taaqumaa taki utkusemineng ighivgaamaan \'91the hunter finished checking the traps as evening was progressing\'92													act of making the rounds to check on traps or nets	jcvjnh. j,[jl ctntq. rfgrfyjd	< taku-?		CK Rub 484		taki	taki	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1080 \
takii-	nfr7-	approach game (while hunting)		angyat nunavagneng teskana takiigaqut \'91a boat out there is approaching a herd of walruses on the ice down there\'92; takiilghiit wiin yakughhutelteki \'91let's go slower for now for (the sake of) the ones who are approaching game\'92; uugtemeng takiimaluta ayveghem aaniinkut \'91when we were approaching a seal on ice, a walrus popped up\'92													to approach game (while hunting)		< taku-?-		CK A & W 118		taki-	takx-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1251 -\
taklagh-	nfrk]z4-	spread out		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0 taklaghtuq 'he stretched out'; taklaghtaa 'he stretched it out'	stretched out												spread out; stretched out		PY-S takla3- (under PE tak0-)				taklagh-	taklagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
taklaghrukegte-	nfrk]z4hers[ns-	straight (be ~)															to be straight		< taklagh-ruk-kegte-				taklaghrukegte-	taklaghrukegte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
taklaghruketun	nfrk]z4hersney	straight		
\f2\i adverbial particle													
\f0\i0 straight		< taklagh-ruk-kegte-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 taklaghruketun	taklaghruketun	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
taku-	nfre-	go to a specific place for a definite reason		takwaa 'he went to it' / takwiiguq 'he went for something'; 
\f2\i Takuluku
\f0\i0  meteghllugllagem sayugaa. 'After 
\f2\i going over to him
\f0\i0  (the wolf) the big raven pulled him out (of the water).' (AYUM. UNGIP. I:8)													to go to a specific place for a definite reason		PE taku-				taku-	taku-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 -\
takumrraaqe-	nfrevi62s-	leave (it, an important or valuable thing) out		manit takumrraaqigatiit \'91they don\'92t just put money anywhere\'92; takumrraaqegpenaki megnunalghiit tamaakut \'91don\'92t just put important things anywere\'92													to leave (it, an important or valuable thing) out		< taku-?-		CK A & W 118		takumrraqe-	takumrrxqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1096 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 -\
takumsug-	nfrevc/u-	go somewhere for pleasure or entertainment															to go somewhere for pleasure or entertainment		< taku-msug-				takumsug-	takumsug-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
takumsunaq	nfrevc/yf2	attractive (thing that has been made ~ to behold)		aghnaghaat takumsugnaghsaatesqumakangit \'91they told the girls to fix up themselves up so that they will look attractive\'92													thing that has been made attractive to behold				CK A & W 118; Rub 485		takumsunaq	takumsunaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
takuughagh-	nfr84f4	go from place to place		qaagna nunalgun takuughaghaqluku ungipaaqiisqaat \'91they told him to go house-to-house out there to spread the word\'92													to go from place to place		< taku-?- (?)		CK A & W 118		takughagh-	takxghagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1263 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \
takuyangllagh-	nfreqf3k]f4-	tap on another's shoulders to get attention		ilani nagaqunghisan takuyangllaghluku qiivyan ungipaataa \'91when his partner didn\'92t hear, he tapped on his shoulder and when he turned, he told him\'92													to tap on another's shoulders to get attention		< taku-?-ngllagh-		CK A & W 118		takuyangllagh-	takuyangllagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1253 \u1072 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
takwiista	nfr17cnf	inspector			investigator												inspector; investigator		< taku-i\super 1\nosupersub -(s)ta				takwista	takwxsta	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1265 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
tala	nfkz	dollar		Entaqun umyugaan seghleqaa, palaghaghnnaqniluku. Elngaatall aneghneghnnaqsaghaa tukfighluku. Qafsina-thousand 
\f2\i talaghllak
\f0\i0  piyaghaa. \'91He must have thought that it [the fur] [was being appraised] to low. The sale seemed like a good deal [to me]. He was being offered so many thousands of 
\f2\i dollars
\f0\i0  for it.\'92 (PANGEGH. 12)													dollar		from English \'91dollar\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 161		tala	tala	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
talaghitagh-	nfkz4bnf4-	jump up from the surface of the water (of a fish)															to jump up from the surface of the water (of a fish)		cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik talaa3iq \'91rainbow trout\'92				talaghitagh-	talaghitagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
taliighpaguute-	nfk75gfu8ns-	view (come momentarily into ~)			come momentarily into view												to come momentarily into view		< taluq-?-				talighpagute-	talxghpagxte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
talitaghwaagh-	nfkbnf4164-	sight (keep out of ~)															to keep out of sight		< talite-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -				talitaghwagh-	talitaghwxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
talite-	nfkbns-	sight (go out of ~ behind something)		talituq \'91he went behind something\'92; talitaa (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  talitestaa) \'91he took it out of sight\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  talu-													to go out of sight behind something		PE talit- (under PE talu(-))				talite-	talite-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tallaagh-	nfk]94-	split sinew for thread															to split sinew for thread		< tallu-?-				tallagh-	tallxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
tallaaq	nfk]92	split sinew			sinew, split												split sinew		< tallu-aq				tallaq	tallxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
talligh-	nfk]b4-	dance with arm motions only, seated, following one, usually northern, Eskimo style		Ukivagmiit tallighnaqut \'91the King Islanders are going to dance while seated\'92; tallit esghapagnaghllaguut \'91dances while seated are very entertaining\'92													to dance Inupiaq style, seated,with arm motions only		PE ta@i3				talligh-	talligh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
Tallimaa aghneq	Nfk]bv6 f4ys2	Thursday		
\f2\i so called because Thursday is the fifth day of the week													
\f0\i0 Thursday		< tallimat + aghneq			xxxa	Tallima aghneq	Tallimx aghneq	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1084 \u257  \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tallimagneq	fk]bvfuys2	five things or groups		
\f2\i used with a plural ending and therefore realized as 
\f0\i0 tallimagneghet, tallimagneghneng, 
\f2\i etc.; used to indicate five things, when the noun for that thing is used in the plural or dual even for a single entitity, or to indicate five groups (such as families), thus: 
\f0\i0  \'85 mangteghat 
\f2\i tallimagneghet
\f0\i0  aliighumalghiit. \'91\'85 
\f2\i five
\f0\i0  houses had come into view.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 20); 
\f2\i note that the plural, 
\f0\i0 mangteghat, 
\f2\i without the word in question could  be used for a single house													
\f0\i0 five things; five groups		< tallima(t)-gneq				tallimagneq	tallimagneq	\uc0\u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tallimat	nfk]bvfn	five		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  talliq; 
\f2\i the word
\f0\i0  tallimat 
\f2\i is a plural, but the singular, 
\f0\i0 tallima, 
\f2\i can also occur as in:  
\f0\i0 Ayumiqulleq 
\f2\i tallima
\f0\i0  atughaghput tagitemnneng. \'91We have been here 
\f2\i five
\f0\i0  years since we moved back.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 43)													five		PE ta@@imat				tallimat	tallimat	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1090 \
tallimiin	nfk]bv7y	fifth one or fifth time															the fifth one; the fifth time		< talliman-?-				tallimin	tallimxn	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1084 \u1251 \u1085 \
talliq	nfk]b2	arm															arm		PE ta@i3				talliq	talliq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
talliqeregaq	nfk]b2shsuf2	foreleg socket or joint of animal			hole on sea mammal skin where the front flipper was												foreleg socket or joint of animal; hole on sea mammal skin where the front flipper was		< talliq-?-regaq		gloss 2: CK Rub 488		talliqeregaq	talliqeregaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
talliquq	nfk]b2e2	back fin			front flipper of sea mammal												back fin; front flipper of sea mammal		< talliq-quq; PE ta@iqu3 (under PE ta@i3)		gloss 2: Rub 488		talliquq	talliquq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
tallu-	nfk]/-	split sinew for thread		talluuq \'91he is splitting sinew\'92; tallaa \'91he is splitting it\'92 /													to split sinew for thread		PY talu3- or ta@u(3)-				tallu-	tallu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 -\
tallugh-	nfk]/4-	shy		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  tallughyugtuq \'91he feels timid, intimidated or cowed\'92; talluqaa \'91he feels timid toward him, intimidated by him\'92; tallughnatun \'91harshly, severely\'92	intimidated	cowed								timid			shy; intimidated; cowed; timid		PE ta@u3-				tallugh-	tallugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
talugh-	nfk/5-	move out of sight		talughtuq \'91he moved out of sight\'92 / talughtaa \'91he moved it out of sight\'92; Neghllak qemim qaaynganilnguq 
\f2\i talughngayaghqaanghituq
\f0\i0 . \'91A building on a hill shall not be 
\f2\i hid
\f0\i0 .\'92 (Matthew 5:14)	sight (move out of ~)												to move out of sight		PE talu(3)				talugh-	talugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1203 -\
talughaghtagh-	nfk/4f5nf4-	move repeatedly in and out of sight															to move repeatedly in and out of sight		< talugh-aghtagh-				talughaghtagh-	talughaghtagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
taluq	nfk/2	area out of sight		nunavaget talaakun takuluki llaaghanwha pikengvikumakangit \'91they approached a herd of waluses where they couldn\'92t be seen, and so they caught some of them\'92; talaakun sakayuget liigikestengngunateng natelnguut yuget \'91some different people can do things without it being known\'92	sight (area out of ~)												area out of sight		PE talu(-)				taluq	taluq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1179 \
taluutaq	nfk8nf2	screen to keep one out of view		sikiggaq uyghagllagmeng qantaghansan, mekelghiighhaam uyghak taluutaqluku sikiggaq teghigtuumakanga \'91when the squirrel was near the big rock, the boy used that rock as a screen to keep from being seen and waited for it so he could hit it\'92													screen to keep one out of view		< talugh-(u)taq		CK A & W 119		talutaq	talxtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
talwa	nfk1f	even (not ~)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  paaghqituq, talwa naagu qikmighhaq no creature is there not even a puppy; taayughqelluni talwa unisimii ilangi aatkani he was leaving in such a hurry that he even left behind some of his clothing; aghulaqumalghiillu talwa esghanghitaqa he had already left and I didn't even get to see him\'92; 
\f2\i Talwa
\f0\i0  kitum alngunak kenelghutak kumaghllukek sagneghmun asingiinnaanghitaak. \'91No one 
\f2\i at all
\f0\i0  lights a lamp and puts it underneath a vessel.\'92 (Matthew 5.15); Atagpesi liisimakaa aklukegkaghsi, 
\f2\i talwa
\f0\i0  aaptestegpenasi. \'91Your Father knws your needs, 
\f2\i even
\f0\i0  
\f2\i though
\f0\i0  you don\'92t ask him.\'92 (Matthew 6.8)	yet	addition (in ~)								not even			even; not even; yet; in addition		from Chukchi \'93tIlv-\'94 \'91quite\'92				talwa	talwa	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1265 \u1072 \
tamaa-	nfv6-	chew		tamaaguq \'91he chewed; tamaagaa he chewed it\'92 /													to chew		PE tamu3-				tama-	tamx-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u257 -\
tamaghhagh-	nfvf5f4-	all		
\f2\i used in the quantifier/qualifier construction
\f0\i0 ; tamaghhaghmeng aghulaqut \'91they all left\'92; tamaghhaamta aanqaghtaatukut \'91we all suddenly went out\'92; tamaghhaghmek neghaquk \'91they are both eating\'92; Meghem kayunga 
\f2\i tamaghhaan
\f0\i0  ungipaatquumakanga, \'93Amaa esnamun aghneq 
\f2\i tamaghhaan
\f0\i0  piyaagaquq.\'94 \'91He told 
\f2\i every
\f0\i0   bullhead of the sea, \'93A wolf walks on the shore 
\f2\i every
\f0\i0  day.\'94\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 84)	both	every											all; both (when used in dual); every		PE tama3-				tamaghhagh-	tamaghhagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tamana, tamaana	nfvfyf. nfv6yf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  maana																			tamana, tamana	tamana, tamxna	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 , \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u257 \u1085 \u1072 \
tameghaq	nfvs4f2	piece of meat that is eaten with something oily		sameng tameghighluku neghnakefut \'91we\'92ll add some meat with it and eat it\'92; tameghaghqameng negniimaanga \'91I took a share of meat for to be eaten with something oily\'92													piece of meat that is eaten with something oily				CK A & W 119		tameghaq	tameghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tamekestaq	nfvsrscnf2	something that is not supposed to be swallowed, but just chewed		kaamet enkaam whaa tamekestaagut \'91so gum is one that isn\'92t to be swallowed, but just chewed\'92; ayumiq tamekestangllaghluteng pikayuget \'91long ago, they would make something that would only be chewed\'92													something that is not supposed to be swallowed, but just chewed		PE tamu3-		CK A & W 119		tamekestaq	tamekestaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tamlag-	nfvkzu-	land (of a boat)		tamlagtuq \'91it (the boat) or he (the person in the boat) landed\'92; tamlagaa \'91it landed at it\'92 / tamlagutaa \'91he landed it\'92	beach a boat												to land (of a boat); to beach a boat		PY-S tamla!-				tamlag-	tamlag-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 -\
tamlagvik	nfvkzudbr	dock			wharf												dock; wharf		< tamlag-vik				tamlagvik	tamlagvik	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
tamlineq	nfvkbys2	curtain (lower part of ~ of the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 tamlinghet, 
\f2\i for one curtain													
\f0\i0 lower part of curtain of the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , theinsulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house				CK Rub 490		tamlineq	tamlineq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tamlu	nfvk/	chin															chin		PE tamlu				tamlu	tamlu	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1102 \
tamlughun	nfvk/4ey	chin tatoo		
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  tamlughuta	tatoo on chin												chin tatoo		< tamlu-?-(u)n				tamlughun	tamlughun	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
Tamniq	Nfvyb2	Tomname Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Tomname Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Tamniq	Tamniq	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1084 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \
tampa	nfvgf	damper															damper		from English \'91damper\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 161		tampa	tampa	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1087 \u1072 \
tamuneq	nfveys2	clam type		
\f2\i species identification undetermined; 
\f0\i0 Ayvemta siighnaa 
\f2\i tamuneghmeng
\f0\i0  imaqeftuq. \'91The stomach of the walrus we caught was full of 
\f2\i razor clams
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 157)	razor clam												type of large clam; razor clam (?)		PE tamu3- (?)				tamuneq	tamuneq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tane-	nfys-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > taane-, tanughqe-																			tane-	tane-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 -\
tanem	nfysv	finally		
\f2\i particle; with the implication of a good outcome despite conditions; usually used with the postbase
\f0\i0  -laatagh-, \'91to V again, to V anyway\'92,
\f2\i on the verb;
\f0\i0  tanem aliighlaataghaa \'91once again it has cleared up\'92; tanem aviiteghllagluni kaatataghaghlaataghtuq \'91finally, after being away for so long, he returned\'92	once again												finally; once again	cyjdf\\ jgznm			CK V & E 125 (Russ voc)		tanem	tanem	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \
tanemlleqa	nfysvk]s2f	and then again		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 again (and then ~)												and then again		< tanem=lleqa				tanemlleqa	tanemlleqa	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \
tanemwha	nfysv1]f	then also		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 then also		< tanem=wha				tanemwha	tanemwha	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \
tangeghqaq	nf3s52f2	bread															bread		< tangeq\super 1\nosupersub -?- (?)				tangeghqaq	tangeghqaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
tangeghsaghtugh-	nf3s5cf5ne4-	go to a relative\'92s grave after five days of mourning		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to go to a relative\'92s grave after five days of mourning				CK Rub 493		tangeghsaghtugh-	tangeghsaghtugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
tangeghtu-	nf3s5ne-	solid (be ~)		Aghnasalgem ayveghem mangunangi 
\f2\i tangeghtughllagtut
\f0\i0 . \'91The skin of the cow walrus is very 
\f2\i tough
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 158)	hard (be ~(material))	tough (be ~)							tangaghtu- in Rub 492				to be solid; to be hard; to be tough		< tangeq\super 1\nosupersub -tu-				tangeghtu-	tangeghtu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 -\
tangeghtughte-	nf3s5ne5ns-	harden															to harden		< tangeghtu-ghte-				tangeghtughte-	tangeghtughte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tangeghtupaaruq	nf3s5neg6he2	hickory wood as used in sleds															hickory wood as used in sleds		< tangeghtu-?-				tangeghtuparuq	tangeghtupxruq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u257 \u1088 \u1091 \u1179 \
tangela	nf3skz	funnel															funnel		perhaps from English \'91dangler\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 161		tangela	tangela	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \

\f1\b tangeq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nf3s2\'a1	solid part of something			reason behind something												solid part of something; reason behind something		PE ta&03-				tangeq1	tangeq1	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1179 1\

\f1\b tangeq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nf3s2\'99	ancestor		
\f2\i this may be the same word as 
\f0\i0 tangeq\super 1\nosupersub  r
\f2\i ather than a homonym													
\f0\i0 ancestor						tangeq2	tangeq2	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1179 2\
tangeqeghrengetaq	nf3s2s4hs3snf2	oar or mast, long, tied at the bow of a boat to help keep the boat from tilting to one side when it is being walked over rough ice		uwanlluten tangeqeghrengetami pi iknaqsugneghhaaluten \'91be at the front part of the boat at the oar while it is being walked over the ice, since you are strong\'92													long oar or mast tied at the bow of a boat to help keep the boat from tilting to one side when it is being walked over rough ice				CK A & W 118		tangeqeghrengetaq	tangeqeghrengetaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tangeqrak	nf3s2ifr	pilot bread		
\f2\i a Savoonga word	
\f0\i0 cracker												pilot bread; cracker		< tangeq\super 1\nosupersub -krak				tangeqrak	tangeqrak	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
tangigh-	nf3b4-	eat (greens) along with one\'92s other food		yuuk tangightuq nunivagmeng \'91the man is eating greens with his food\'92; yugem tangighaa nunivak uqughqun \'91the man is eating the greens with blubber\'92													to eat (greens) along with one\'92s other food						tangigh-	tangigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
tangki	nf3rb	power winch		Enkaam angyaghpagmeng taagken angwaaghumaamta uteghmun, taakut 
\f2\i tangkimiita
\f0\i0  iighsuutet uyghiin, ghhataghnaqem angtalnganeng, \'85. \'91Then the ship tried to go backwards using a 
\f2\i winch
\f0\i0  and the having the anchors as deadmen in an effort to free the ship, \'85\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:140)	winch (power ~)												power winch		from English \'91donkey (engine)\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 161		tangki	tangki	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1082 \u1080 \
tangtagh-	nf3nf4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > tangtaquq, tangteghaq, tangtaqergaq																			tangtagh-	tangtagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tangtaqergaq	nf3nf2shuf2	cooked blubber			blubber, cooked												cooked blubber		< tangtagh-?				tangtaqergaq	tangtaqergaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1088 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
tangtaqughruk	nf3nf2e4her	bronchial tube											given by Rub. as tangtaqugruk				bronchial tube	,hjy[b	< tangtaquq-ruk		CK Rub 493		tangtaqughruk	tangtaqughruk	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
tangtaquq	nf3nf2e2	cartilage		aghneq neghuutukut aghveghem tangtaqghwaneng \'91today we ate whale cartilage\'92													cartilage		PE natanqu3 and nata&qu3; < tangtagh-quq				tangtaquq	tangtaquq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
tangteghaq	nf3ns4f2	cartilage in nose		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  tangteghak, 
\f2\i for nasal passages	
\f0\i0 nasal passages												cartilage in nose; nasal passages		< tangtagh-?				tangteghaq	tangteghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tangyeghiitaq	nf3qs47nf2	wrist warmer															wrist warmer		< tangyeq-ghiitaq				tangyeghitaq	tangyeghxtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tangyeghmik	nf3qs4vbr	wristwatch		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 tangyeghmigek,
\f2\i  for one watch													
\f0\i0 wristwatch		< tangyeq-mik				tangyeghmik	tangyeghmik	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
tangyeghun	nf3qs4ey	bracelet		
\f2\i also 
\f0\i0 tangyeghuta; 
\f2\i also used in the plural,
\f0\i0  tangyeghutet,
\f2\i  for one bracelet;
\f0\i0  esghaghyaqenni aawmeng tangyeghusighlliluni pananga\'91when he saw it, the spear had a ring of blood on it\'92	ring around something												bracelet; ring around something		< tangyegh-(u)n		gloss 2: CK Rub 492		tangyeghun	tangyeghun	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
tangyeq 	nf3qs2	wrist		tangyeghegka 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tangyeghenka \'91my wrists\'92													wrist		PE taya3n03				tangyeq 	tangyeq 	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1253 \u1099 \u1179 \
tanigh-	nfyb4-	cut piece off of (it)		tanighaa \'91he cut off a piece of it\'92 / tanighiiq \'91he cut off a piece\'92													to cut piece off of (it)						tanigh-	tanigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
tanighaate-	nfyb46ns-	exception (be an ~)		ataasiq yuuk akulangitneng tanighaalluni qinuyugullghiit pillghisimalghii \'91one person was an exception when they all got sick\'92; iqallugameng nuluuteghllagni tanighaalluni kayunneghmeng aghtughtuq \'91when we were all jigging for tomcod, he was the only one who didn\'92t get any\'92													to be an exception		< tanigh-?-		CK A & W 120		tanighate-	tanighxte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tanightugh-	nfyb5ne4-	cut off pieces		tanightughtuq \'91he cut off pieces\'92; tanightughaa \'91he cut pieces off of it\'92 /													to cut off pieces		< tanigh-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				tanightugh-	tanightugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
taniilqe-	nfy7k]2s-	treat unequally		piniqillelek yuuk taniillghituq avangituq \'91a man who is considerate never leaves anyone out\'92; nengiillghiit ilateng taniilqelluki pimalghiit \'91when they were dividing the food, they didn\'92t include others\'92	leave out												to treat unequally; to leave out				CK A & W 120		tanilqe-	tanxlqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tanngae	nfy3fs	stranger		tannget \'91a band of strangers\'92; Tawani kiyaghsimaluki, pillugaghyaghtut tagimalghiit, 
\f2\i tannget
\f0\i0 . \'91As they were living like that warriors came, 
\f2\i raiders
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 45)	foreigner	raider								bandit			stranger; foreigner; raider; bandit		from Chukchi tan&0tan, pl. tan&0t \'91stranger, Koryak, European\'92	14			tanngae	tanngae	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
tanngengilga	nfy3s3bkuf	string															string	dthtdrf	from Chukchi tan&0&el!0n \'91?\'92		CK V & E 92; Rub 491		tanngengilga	tanngengilga	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1187 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u1072 \

\f1\b tannguurnga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nfy38h3f\super s	\nosupersub sled, large, used by Chukotkan reindeer herders															large sled used by Chukotkan reindeer herders		from Chukchi ?	x	from Yupik Lore, vol. 2, p. 196-7		tanngurngae	tanngxrngae	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1187 \u1263 \u1088 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
tanpeghraq	nfygs4hf2	tarpaulin			hide, old	material, thick											tarpaulin for a tent; old hide or thick material		< tanpeq-?		CK Rub 492		tanpeghraq	tanpeghraq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
tanpeq	nfygs2	walrus hide, dried, as used on the traditional dome-shaped house, or on a skin boat															dried walrus hide as used on the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.), or on a skin boat						tanpeq	tanpeq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \
tanpigh-	nfygb4-	put on dried walrus hide		tanpightuq \'91it or he (i.e. his house or boat) got a walrus hide covering\'92; tanpighaa \'91he put walrus hide on it\'92 /													to put on, or get put on, dried walrus hide		< tanpeq-ligh-				tanpigh-	tanpigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1087 \u1080 \u1271 -\
tanqighhiinaghqun	nfy2b57yf52ey	monthly		
\f2\i particle; Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 ellnga tanqighhiinaghqun aglaghaquq nunaghllagmun \'91he goes to town monthly\'92													monthly	t;tvtczxyj	< tanqiq-ghhaq-(ng)inaq-
\f2\i vialis		
\f0\i0 CK Rub 491		tanqighhinaghqun	tanqighhxnaghqun	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
tanqighlluk	nfy2b5k]/r	moonlight, bright															bright moonlight		< tanqiq-lluk				tanqighlluk	tanqighlluk	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
tanqighsuun	nfy2b5c0y	calendar		
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  tanqighsuuta													calendar		< tanqiq-?-(u)n				tanqighsun	tanqighsxn	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u772 \u1085 \
tanqiq	nfy2b2	moon		tanqiq piituq \'91there\'92s a new moon\'92; tanqiq naqenqaghquq \'91the moon is full\'92; tanqiq avegsimaaq \'91there\'92s a half moon, it\'92s the middle of the month\'92; tanqighllugllak \'91bright moonlight\'92	month												moon; month		PE tanqi3			> tanqighlluk, tanqighsuun	tanqiq	tanqiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \
tanughqe-	nfye52s-	scrub thoroughly		mingla tanughqaa \'91he scrubbed the wall thoroughly\'92													to scrub thoroughly		< tane-?-				tanughqe-	tanughqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tape-	nfgs-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > taape-, taperghugh-, tapughtugh-															PE tap0t-\super 2				\nosupersub tape-	tape-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 -\
tapeghaataq	nfgs46nf2	rope attached to the bow of the boat		angyat qagallaagmi tamlagnaqelghiit, quutmeng sivuyagta araghaat, \'93tapeghaataq milutigu!\'94 \'91they yelled from the shore to the man at the bow of the boat that was about to land through the waves, \'93throw the painter!\'94\'92	painter (rope attached to the bow of the boat)												painter (rope attached to the bow of the boat)				CK A  & W 120		tapeghataq	tapeghxtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Tapeghaq	Nfgs4f2	Troutman Lake (north beach of ~)															north beach of Troutman Lake (Naayvaq)						Tapeghaq	Tapeghaq	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
taperghugh-	nfgsh4e4-	seep slowly and continuously															to seep slowly and continuously		< tape-?-				taperghugh-	taperghugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1271 \u1091 \u1271 -\
tapghaaghaq	nfg564f2	razor clam			rock-boring clam	rope, long and  thing											razor or rock-boring clam; long thin rope		< tapghaq-aghaq				tapghaghaq	tapghxghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1203 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tapghaghaghtagh-	nfg5f4f5nf4-	lasso reindeer		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to lasso reindeer		< tapghaq-?-				tapghaghaghtagh-	tapghaghaghtagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Tapghaghaq	Nfg5f4f2	Silook Camp on north shore of Koozata Lagoon															Silook Camp on north shore of Koozata Lagoon						Tapghaghaq	Tapghaghaq	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tapghaghrak	nfg5f4hfr	rope on harpoon and float															rope on harpoon and float		< tapghaq-?-				tapghaghrak	tapghaghrak	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
tapgham ketanga	nfg5fv rsnf3f	southwest															southwest		< tapghaq-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + keta-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxk	tapgham ketanga	tapgham ketanga	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1084  \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \
Tapghapagaq	Nfg5fgfufr	Ataakas Camp on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Ataakas Camp on St. Lawrence Is.		< tapghaq-?				Tapghapagaq	Tapghapagaq	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \
tapghaq	nfg5f2	rope			isthmus	long sandy beach								spider web			rope; isthmus; long sandy beach; spider web				gloss 4: CK Rub 493	> tapghaghaghtagh-, tapghaaghaq, tapghaghrak, tapgham ketanga, tapghi-	tapghaq	tapghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
tapghi-	nfg5b-	make rope			rope (make ~)												to make rope		< tapghaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -				tapghi-	tapghi-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1203 \u1080 -\
Tapghuq	Nfg5e2	Apetiki Camp on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Apetiki Camp on St. Lawrence Is.						Tapghuq	Tapghuq	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1087 \u1203 \u1091 \u1179 \
tapi-	nfgb-	sew a patch onto the sole of a boot to keep water out		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to sew a patch onto the sole of a boot to keep water out				CK Rub 493		tapi-	tapi-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 -\
Tapisagek	Nfgbcfusr	Tapisaghak River on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Tapisaghak River on St. Lawrence Is.						Tapisagek	Tapisagek	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1082 \
taplaa-	nfgk]9-	start being away from parents (animals or humans)			wander	walk around on one\'92s own (of a baby or child)											to start being away from parents (animals or humans); to wander; to walk around on one\'92s own (of a baby or child)						tapla-	taplx-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 -\
tapnaghte-	nfgy]f5ns-	reinforce a worn out part of a rope with another rope		sakeqsiqaq tapghaq tapnaghlluku atughaat \'91they put a rope alongside the worn out one in case it breaks\'92													to reinforce a worn out part of a rope with another rope				CK A & W 121		tapnaghte-	tapnaghte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tapughtugh-	nfge5ne4-	seep through (continue to ~)															to continue to seep through		< tape-ugh-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				tapughtugh-	tapughtugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
tapusigh-	nfgecb4-	add another rope as a reinforcement		ayveq naghullegluku alla tapusighaat \'91they harpooned the walrus and added second line to it\'92													to add another rope as a reinforcement				CK A & W 121		tapusigh-	tapusigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
taqayuqe-	nf2f/2s-	reach the limits of one's physical abilities due to overwork		neghighluku yuget nukalpigat ulapesteghhllagaqegkangit repall ilangani taqayuqaqluteng \'91in the old days, they would have the boys exercise so much that some of them reach the limits of their physical abilities\'92; qikmii taqayuqluni nengnnaniimalghii \'91the dog couldn\'92t pull anymore from reaching the limits of its physical abilities\'92													to reach the limits of one's physical abilities due to overwork				CK A & W 121		taqayuqe-	taqayuqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 -\
taqe-	nf2s-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > taaqe-, taqellengugh-, taqugh-															PE taq0-				taqe-	taqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
taqefkagh-	nf2sarf4-	finish quickly		ulimaragkiiqani taqefkaghluku unugtestegpenaan akikumakanga \'91he sold his quickly made carving after finishing it before night\'92; kaamgek angatughqegkagni taqefkaamaak \'91she finished the boots she was working on right away\'92													to finish quickly		< taqe-?-		CK A & W 121		taqefkagh-	taqefkagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
taqelghagh-	nf2sk4f4-	complete the work on (it)		kaamgek kakikagni aghnam taqelghaghaqeftaak \'91the woman was completing the boots that she had been sewing\'92; homework-eni Monday-vagilgan taqelghaamii \'91she completed her homework before Monday\'92													to complete the work on (it)				CK A & W 121		taqelghagh-	taqelghagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b taqellengugh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nf2sk]s3e4-\'a1	patient (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 persevering (be ~)												to be patient and persevering		< taqe-?-				taqellengugh-1	taqellengugh-1	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub taqellengugh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nf2sk]s3e4-\'99	tire being asked and to finally agree or give in			reach point where one can no longer refuse	tire of gossip and to start to defend oneself											to tire of being asked and finally agree or give in; to reach point where one can no longer refuse; to tire of gossip and to start to defend oneself		< taqe-?-		CK A &  W 121		taqellengugh-2	taqellengugh-2	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub taqeq	nf2s2	vein		taaqghi \'91his veins\'92	artery	capillary											vein; artery; capillary		PE taqa3				taqeq	taqeq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1179 \
taqiiq	nf272	cod-like fish, small		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; caught in slush in early winter													
\f0\i0 small cod-like fish				SLI Cur. Man. 53		taqiq	taqxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1251 \u1179 \
taqik	nf2br	boundary between meat and blubber of whale or any skin		aghveq taqigakun pilagaqeftat \'91it happens so that they are cutting the whale at the part between the meat and blubber\'92; tetaghluki taqiganun, taqigikun makregtaqluki \'91they would cut it down to the meat part then they would cut it off from that part\'92													boundary between meat and blubber of whale or any skin				CK A & W 121; SLI Cur. Man. 81		taqik	taqik	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \
taqmanpak	nf2v]fygfr	adult			mature person	capable person								strong but small adult			adult; mature person; capable person; strong but small adult						taqmanpak	taqmanpak	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1085 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
taqmiigh-	nf2v]74-	finish		angyam piineqellgha taqmiighnaqaat \'91they are about to finish painting the boat\'92; qamiyek ulimaaghegni taqmiighaqeftaak \'91it shows that he is finishing the sled that he is making\'92	complete												to finish; to complete		< taqe-?-		CK A & W 121 CK		taqmigh-	taqmxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1084 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
taqugh-	nf2e4-	finish one by one		taqughtuq 'he finished one item after another'; taqughaa 'he finished them one after another'													to finish one by one		< taqe-ugh-				taqugh-	taqugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
taqughte-	nf2e5ns-	braid one's hair		taqughtuq 'she braided her (own) hair'; taqughtaa 'she braided her (another's) hair' /													to braid one's hair		PY-S taquq				taqughte-	taqughte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
taqughun	nf2e4ey	tatoo		
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  taqughuta	cheek tatoo, woman's	woman's cheek tatoo											woman's cheek tatoo		< taquq-(u)n				taqughun	taqughun	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
taqughutaq	nf2e4enf2	fastener for braids															fastener for braids		< taqughte-(u)taq				taqughutaq	taqughutaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
taqupiitaq	nf2eg7nf2	headband		= taqupitaq	temple												headband; temple		< taquq-?		gloss 2: 487		taqupitaq	taqupxtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
taqupitaq	nf2egbnf2	headband		= taqupiitaq	temple												headband; temple		< taquq-?		gloss 2: 487		taqupitaq	taqupitaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
taquq	nf2e2	side of face			face (side of ~)												side of face		PY-S taquq				taquq	taquq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
taqusneghaq*	nf2ecys4f2	red-dyed skin of baby seal			sealskin (red-dyed ~)												red-dyed skin of baby seal		< taqe-?				taqusneghaq*	taqusneghaq*	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
taqustaqaa-	nf2ecnf26-	suffocate			choke												to suffocate; to choke		< taqe-?-		CK		taqustaqa-	taqustaqx-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u257 -\
tareqaq	nfhs2f2	walrus hide, small piece without blubber or meat															small piece of walrus hide without blubber or meat						tareqaq	tareqaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1088 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
tareqi-	nfhs2b-	remove blubber from walrus hide															to remove blubber from walrus hide		< tareqaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -				tareqi-	tareqi-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1088 \u1099 \u1179 \u1080 -\
tarughite-	nfhe4bns-	go behind something and out of sight		angyat aapghaat sangwaa qivallugneng tarughinniluku \'91the boat's people told about something that disappeared from view behind the sea ice\'92	disappear from view behind something												to go behind something and out of sight; to disappear from view behind something				CK A & W 122		tarughite-	tarughite-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1088 \u1091 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tasighaq, tasigaq	nfcb4f2. nfcbuf2	piece, front or rear, between gunwales of boat															front or rear piece between the gunwales of boat		< tasiq-ghaq				tasighaq, tasigaq	tasighaq, tasigaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 , \u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
tasighun	nfcb4ey	rope threaded through holes around the bottom edge of the skin cover of the traditional dome-shaped house, and weighted with rocks		
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  tasighuta													rope threaded through holes around the bottom edge of the skin cover of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.), andweighted with rocks		< tasiq-(u)n				tasighun	tasighun	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
tasigu-	nfcbue-	club (with a stick)		ayumiq neghsat uugtet tasiguluki tuququghniiqiit suflugiilluku salin \'91long ago, they say, they would club seals to kill them when they had no guns\'92; unaghsimeng awiim tasigutaqaqelghiit \'91they probably used sticks to club things\'92; tasigutaq 'cane with a handle'													to club (with a stick)						tasigu-	tasigu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 -\
Tasiguvik	Nfcbuedbr	Tasighoovik Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Tasighoovik Bay on St. Lawrence Is.						Tasiguvik	Tasiguvik	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
tasiiq	nfc72	harness-like device for dog		
\f2\i perhaps a makeshift device like a collar;
\f0\i0  yugem maghyaghqughteni tasiighmeng qaghlungllamaa aqnighhnayukan \'91that man made a harness-like device for his lead dog so that it wouldn't get hurt\'92									 tasigu- in Rub 494				harness-like device for dog 				CK A & W 122		tasiq	tasxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
tasik, tasiq	nfcbr. nfcb2	rope, short piece, used for tying or carrying something															short piece of rope used for tying or carrying something		PE taci(!)-				tasik, tasiq	tasik, tasiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1082 , \u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
tasikligh-	nfcbrk]b4-	tie rope onto someone or something															to tie rope onto someone or something		< tasik-?-ligh-				tasikligh-	tasikligh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
Tasiq	Nfcb2	New Chaplino in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices; after the establishment of New Chaplino further up the bay and its receiving the name
\f0\i0  Tasiq, 
\f2\i the former site of 
\f0\i0 Tasiq
\f2\i  has been called 
\f0\i0 Tasipik	former village near Cape Cherkasskogo (near the mouth of Tkachen Bay)	Tkachen Bay in Chukotka											New Chaplino in Chukotka, also former village near Cape Cherkasskogo (near the mouth of Tkachen Bay); Tkachen Bay		PE taci3				Tasiq	Tasiq	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
tasiwaaghaq	nfcb164f2	crosspiece on boat rack		
\f2\i used in pairs													
\f0\i0 crosspiece on boat rack		< tasiq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq-aq				tasiwaghaq	tasiwxghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
taslugh-	nfck]/4-	hold hands with		taslughaa 'he is holding her hand' / tasluutuk 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tasluqutuk 'they\sub 2\nosupersub  are holding hands'									; also tallugh in Rub 488				to hold hands with		PE tatyu3-				taslugh-	taslugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
tasluusiq	nfck0cb2	leash		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 leash	gjdjljr	< taslugh-(u)siq		CK Rub 494		taslusiq	taslxsiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
tasugte-	nfce[ns-	cut a seal from the flipper opening to the front slit when skinning prepratory to stretching and drying the skin		teghiglugem amiiraa tasuglluku niightughaat \'91they cut the skin of the young bearded seal from the flipper opening to the front slit and stretched it to dry\'92													to cut a seal from the flipper opening to the front slit when skinning prepratory to stretching and drying the skin				CK A & W 122		tasugte-	tasugte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1089 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tatame-	nfnfvs-	scared (be ~)			terrified (get ~)												to be scared; to get terrified		PE tatam0(t)-				tatame-	tatame-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 -\
tateghte-	nfns5ns-	brake		tateghtuq 'he put on the brakes' 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  'came to a halt being stuck or coming up against something' (?) / tateghtutaa 'he stopped it by braking or stopped for it'	come up against something	stuck (be ~ on something)											to brake; to come up against; to be stuck on something		PE tat0-		gloss 2, 3: Ck Rub 494		tateghte-	tateghte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Tategnaq	Nfnsuyf2	Tategnak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Tategnak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		< tatek-?; cf. PE -na3 \'91something resembling\'92				Tategnaq	Tategnaq	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
tategruk	nfnsuher	ridge		yuuk mangtegham tategruganun mayughluni qineghpeghwaaghtuq \'91the man climbed to the ridge of the roof and looked around using binoculars\'92; qilughwaaghet tategruggiitnun mekelghiighet mayughtuusimalghiit \'91the boys climbed to the ridge of the high rocks\'92	peak												ridge; peak		< tatek-ruk		CK A & W 122		tategruk	tategruk	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
tategun	nfnsuey	sail, small, put in front of the mast of the boat to help travel in low winds		
\f2\i also 
\f0\i0 tategun;
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  tategutet, 
\f2\i for one such sail;
\f0\i0  aygumun sukanginnaqukut tategutet nekegteki \'91we are going to be slow going against the wind, so put up the jib\'92; tategutelget naqamalla sukaghllaguut \'91so lucky, the ones with jibs are faster\'92	jib												jib (small sail put in front of the mast of the boat to help travel in low winds)		< tegek-(u)n		CK A & W 122		tategun	tategun	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
tatek	nfnsr	bridge of nose		taatgan nenga \'91crosspiece on eyeglasses over bridge of nose\'92	ridge of hills												bridge of nose; ridge of hills		PY-S tat0k				tatek	tatek	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
Tatek	Nfnsr	Tatik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Tatik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		< tatek				Tatek	Tatek	\uc0\u1058 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
tatesaghte-	nfnscz5ns-	hit on the nose															to hit on the nose		< tatek-?-				tatesaghte-	tatesaghte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tatmeghruk	nfnv]s4her	area between shoulder blades		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  = ggatmeghruk	spine from neck to waist												area between shoulder blades; spine from neck to waist				CK Rub 494		tatmeghruk	tatmeghruk	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
tatmileg-	nfnv]bksu-	ricochet		neghsaq guulluku tatmilkaghvikluku unakaa \'91he shot a seal and the bullet ricocheted and hit the seal (again)\'92; aangqaq milulluku tekilluni tatmilegyalghiimi ingaverugllak \'91he threw the ball and it hit the ground and it bounced off far away\'92													ricochet				CK A & W 122		tatmileg-	tatmileg-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
tatngulluk	nfn3]ek]/r	visibility (something that impedes ~)		
\f2\i for example, dense smoke or a group of people or houses blocking the view													
\f0\i0 something that impedes visibility						tatngulluk	tatngulluk	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
tavaghte-	nfdf5ns-	group together by tying (them) together		qawaagtani tavaghlluki qaakii qamiyminun \'91he tied the birds he caught together and placed them on his sled\'92; tallimawaaqluki tavaghtaqiit qawaaget \'91they tie birds together at up to five at a time\'92	tie together in a group												to group together by tying (them) together; to tie together in a group				CK A & W 123		tavaghte-	tavaghte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tavet	nfdsn	starboard (right side of boat)		
\f2\i adverbial particle; see also 
\f0\i0 put													starboard (right side of boat)		from English \'91starboard\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 161		tavet	tavet	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1074 \u1099 \u1090 \
tawa-	nf1f-			
\f2\i demonstrative adverb base; see also
\f0\i0  taana (
\f2\i under
\f0\i0  una)
\f2\i ; see also
\f0\i0  tawani, tawaten																			tawa-	tawa-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 -\
tawala	nf1fkz	dried fish		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 fish, dried								check whether also used on SLI				dried fish		from Chukchi tew\'92el \'91dried fish\'92	14			tawala	tawala	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
tawani	nf1fyb	there															there	pltcm. njn	< tawa-
\f2\i localis				
\f0\i0 tawani	tawani	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
tawaqa	nf1f2f	tobacco															tobacco		from Russian nf,fr (tabak), perhaps via Koryak tavaq \'91tobacco\'92				tawaqa	tawaqa	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \
tawaqapik	nf1f2fgbr	tobacco (leaf ~)			leaf tobacco												leaf tobacco		< tawaqa-pik				tawaqapik	tawaqapik	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
tawarungi-	nf1fhe3b-	depend on for security and support		qikmiq tawarungiiq elpenun 'the dog depends on you'													to depend on for security and support						tawarungi-	tawarungi-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1088 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 -\
tawaten	nf1fnsy	like that		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 that way												like that; that way		< tawa-
\f2\i equalis; 
\f0\i0 PE ta!\super w\nosupersub at0n (under PE ta9va)				tawaten	tawaten	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \
tawatengwaaq	nf1fns3162	that way very much		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 very much that way		< tawaten-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				tawatengwaq	tawatengwxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
tawatenta	nf1fnsynf	fine like that		
\f2\i particle; an expression of approval													
\f0\i0 fine like that		< tawaten-ta				tawatenta	tawatenta	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \
tawatestaghhiinaq	nf1fnscnf57yf2	like that all the time		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 like that all the time		< tawaten-staghhiinaq				tawatestaghhinaq	tawatestaghhxnaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
tawatete-	nf1fnsns-	that way (be ~)		tawateteghngaan 'even though it is like that', \'91let it be that way\'92	like that (be ~)												to be that way; to be like that		< tawaten-?-				tawatete-	tawatete-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tawaviigh-	nf1fd74-	get very close to		tawaviighnaqluku uugta ateghtuq guutestengngunani \'91the seal got off the ice without them shooting it because they got way too close (before they fired)\'92; nunavaget kergamqun tawaviighluki ayveghaghvikumiit \'91they got very close to a herd of walrus on the ice and caught some\'92													to get very close to		< tawa-?-		CK A & W 123		tawavigh-	tawavxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1072 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 -\
tawli	nf1kb	towel		
\f2\i Chukotkan; St. Lawrence Islanders use
\f0\i0  veglluk, 
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0  \'91something like old grass\'92 
\f2\i for
\f0\i0  \'91towel\'92 
\f2\i instead of this word													
\f0\i0 towel		from English \'91towel'	Chuk.	R497		tawli	tawli	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1265 \u1083 \u1080 \
tayeghqagh-	nfqs52f4-	roll up one's sleeves		tayeghqaghluni meghmun kaguuq \'91he rolled up his sleeves and reached into the water\'92; inglugtun tayeghqaghluni peghhightuq \'91he rolled up both sides of his sleeves and washed his hands\'92													to roll up one's sleeves		PE taya3n03		CK A & W 123		tayeghqagh-	tayeghqagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1253 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tayngeruut	nfq3sh8n	nomads\'92 tents		
\f2\i this is a plural													
\f0\i0 nomads\'92 tents		from Chukchi ?	x	from Kaangqwaasii Igaghyat (Vol. 8 No. 2)		tayngerut	tayngerxt	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1099 \u1088 \u1263 \u1090 \
tazigna	nfpbuyf			
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  iigna																			tazigna	tazigna	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
tazikna	nfpbry]f			
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  iikna																			tazikna	tazikna	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \
tazimante-	nfpbnfyns-	gone (be ~)		ayveq malighquqaat atghaghluninguq tazimantuq \'91the walrus they were going after dived and didn\'92t come up again\'92; angyat ayumiq ataasit tazimantekaagut \'91long ago, one boat disappeared\'92	not come back	not show up again											to be gone; to not come back; to not show up again		< tazim(a)-nte-		CK A & W 123 CK		tazimante-	tazimante-	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tazimkaghtaq	nfpbvrf5nf2	from long ago		tazimkaghtameng nalkuutut iggereghwaalghiit \'91the diggers found a really old object\'92; tazimkaghtat ungipaghaatet atughnaqiit \'91they are going to tell a really old story\'92	old one												from long ago; old one		< tazim(na)-kaghtaq		CK A & W 123 CK Rub 484		tazimkaghtaq	tazimkaghtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tazimna	nfpbvyf			
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  iimna																			tazimna	tazimna	\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
tefaay	nsa6q			
\f2\i particle; an expression made at the end of a story, said to represent the sound of spitting, though this act need not accompany the expression; 
\f0\i0 Qamagtuq, tefaay! 'It's done, tefaay!'															PE t0vvu!-				tefay	tefxy	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1092 \u257 \u1253 \
tefli	nsak]b	food particles around one's mouth			stains around one's mouth	crud arond the mouth											food particles, stains, etc., around one's mouth; crud around the mouth		< t0pli				tefli	tefli	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \
teflilgu-	nsak]bkue-	crud around one's mouth (have ~)		teflilguuq 'he has crud around his mouth' /													to have crud around one's mouth		< tefli-lgu-				teflilgu-	teflilgu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 -\
tefliliighqe-	nsak]bk752s-	crud around one's mouth (get ~)															to get crud around one's mouth		< tefli-?-				teflilighqe-	teflilxghqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1083 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
teflingigh-	nsak]b3b4-	wipe one's mouth		teflingightuq 'he wiped his (own) mouth'; teflingighaa 'he wiped his (another's) mouth' /													to wipe one's mouth		< tefli(ng)igh-				teflingigh-	teflingigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
teflingiisiq	nsak]b37cb2	towel, napkin, etc., used to wipe one's mouth															towel, napkin, etc., used to wipe one's mouth		< teflingigh-(u)siq				teflingisiq	teflingxsiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1187 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
Tefliq	Nsak]b2	former village northeast of Old Chaplino in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village northeast of Old Chaplino in Chukotka		< tefte-liq (?)				Tefliq	Tefliq	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
teflitu-	nsak]bne-	crud around one's mouth (have a lot of ~)		teflituuq 'his mouth area is very dirty' /													to have a lot of crud around one's mouth		< tefli-tu				teflitu-	teflitu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 -\
tefsaghug-	nsacf4eu-	wind blows over and down a hill or mountain		nallanga tefsaghulguftuq \'91the area in front of it has wind blowing down\'92													for wind to be blowing over and down a hill or mountain				CK A & W 123		tefsaghug-	tefsaghug-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1092 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1075 -\
tefte-	nsans-	lean over		teftuq 'he leaned over something'; teftaa 'he draped it over something' / teftengngaaq (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tevngaaq) 'it is draped over something'	drape over												to lean over; to drape over		< teve-te\super 1\nosupersub -				tefte-	tefte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tefutaq	nsaenf2	ceiling, made of reindeer skin, of the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 ceiling, made of reindeer skin, of the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house				CK Rub 520		tefutaq	tefutaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1092 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tegak	nsufr	rutting bearded seal		
\f2\i said to smell like gasoline	Erignathus barbatus 
\f0\i0 (bearded seal) rutting												rutting bearded seal 
\f2\i (Erignathus barbatus)		
\f0\i0 PE t0!!a!				tegak	tegak	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1082 \
tegetuwaaq	nsusne162	arctic cinquefoil roots			cinquefoil, arctic, roots	
\f2\i Potentilla hyparctica 
\f0\i0 roots											arctic cinquefoil roots (Potentilla hyparctica)		cf. Central Yup\'92ik t0x0Xpak \'91cinquefoil\'92				tegetuwaq	tegetuwxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
teggaaghqe-	ns[652s-	stiffen from being frozen		uksumi aghvigat eslakun agaghlleghhiini aga teggaaghqaqii \'91when hanging washed clothes in the winter, they become frozen and stiff\'92													to stiffen from being frozen		< tegge-?-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -		CK A & W 124		teggaghqe-	teggxghqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tegge-	ns[s-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > teggaaghqe-, teggellghiigh-, teggeq, teggmag-, teggughte-, teggun, teggussiisiq, teggusiita; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tekagh-, tekruqaq															PE t0!0!-				tegge-	tegge-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1099 -\
teggellghiigh-	ns[sk]574-	afraid, hiding one's fear from others (be ~)		naayvami mekelghiighhaat esghaghluki kanaghnayukata teggellghiighutkumkaniiqii \'91when he saw the boys in the frozen lake, he got scared inside that they might step through (thin ice)\'92; Sivungameng tagiiqngami teggellghiiqaaniiquq iflangwaaghanayukami \'91when he was coming from Savoonga, he says he got scared inside lest he get lost'	scared (feel ~ inside)												to be afraid, hiding one's fear from others; to feel scared inside		< tegge-?-		CK A & W 124		teggellghigh-	teggellghxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1251 \u1271 -\
teggeq	ns[s2	hard wood															hard wood		< tegge-?-				teggeq	teggeq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1099 \u1179 \
teggi-	ns[b-	stiffen		aningwaaghaa teggiluni imangumalghii \'91his boil got hard then it got puss\'92; paninang teggiluni ayuquq kilillgha \'91his cut still is as when it got hard\'92	harden												to stiffen; to harden		< tegge-(gh/l)i-		CK A & W 124		teggi-	teggi-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1080 -\
teggmag-	ns[v]fu-	stiff (be ~)															to be stiff		< tegge-?-				teggmag-	teggmag-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1075 -\
teggmagsaasiq	ns[v]f[c9cb2 	iron for clothes		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 iron for clothes	en/u	< teggmag-sagh-(u)siq		CK V & E 82		teggmagsasiq	teggmagsxsiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
teggmak	ns[v]fr	stiff thing															stiff thing		< tegge-?				teggmak	teggmak	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1082 \
teggughte-	ns[e5ns-	compress into a hard ball															to compress into a hard ball		< tegge-(gh)ughte-				teggughte-	teggughte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
teggun	ns[ey	splint		
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  tegguta													splint		< tegge-(u)n				teggun, tegguta	teggun, tegguta	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1091 \u1085 \
teggusiisiq	ns[ec7cb2	stretcher		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  teggusiisik, 
\f2\i for one stretcher													
\f0\i0 stretcher		< tegge-(u)sigh-(u)siq				teggusisiq	teggusxsiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
teggusiita	ns[ec7nf	stiffener		
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  teggusiin													stiffener		< tegge-(u)sigh-(u)ta				teggusita	teggusxta	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \
tegh-	ns4-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > teghsagh-, teghtugh-; = tagh-; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 teghlugte-															PE 0t03-				tegh-	tegh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 -\
teghaghnak	ns4f4yfr	center part of a whale's tail between the flukes		veghak qamestiighyaqmegtekek teghaghnak siiptuk \'91when they cut up the whale's tail, the left out the center part\'92; teghaghnak iiklukek angyalgem taglaasimaak \'91they removed the center part between teh whale's flukes, and the captain brought it home\'92													center part of a whale's tail between the flukes				CK A & W 124		teghaghnak	teghaghnak	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
teghhmalleq	ns5v]fk]s2	hole for shaft in harpoon point															hole for shaft in harpoon point		< teq-?-lleq				teghhmalleq	teghhmalleq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
teghhmiikwaaq	ns5v]7r162	liquid driping when a tilted container		egllumun uqiisikek teghhmiikwaaghllaguuk \'91the stove oil drips from the container that they used to fill the tank\'92													liquid driping from a tilted container				CK A & W 124		teghhmikwaq	teghhmxkwxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1084 \u1100 \u1251 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
teghhute-	ns5ens-			
\f2\i slang -- considered offensive													
\f0\i0 to have sexual intercourse						teghhute-	teghhute-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
teghhwaaghigh-	ns5164b4-	laugh hard with delight															to laugh hard with delight						teghhwaghigh-	teghhwxghigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
teghig-	ns4bu-	fun (having ~)		
\f2\i emotional root: 
\f0\i0 teghigyugtuq \'91he's having fun\'92; teghignaghtuq \'91it\'92s fun\'92; teghikaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  teghiyukaa \'91he considers it fun\'92; teghignatun \'91enjoyably\'92; Tagi naghaalgusighyaghtughqung. Whani 
\f2\i teghignapigtuq!
\f0\i0  \'91Come play with us. It\'92s really 
\f2\i fun
\f0\i0  here!\'92 (SULUWET 19)	enjoying oneself												having fun; enjoying oneself						teghig-	teghig-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1075 -\
teghightugh-	ns4b5ne4-	stalk			pursue												to stalk; to pursue		< teghik-?-				teghightugh-	teghightugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
Teghiglugsiq	Ns4buk/[cb2	February		
\f2\i also given in one source as 
\f0\i0 April	March												February; March		< teghigluk-siq				Teghiglugsiq	Teghiglugsiq	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
teghigluk	ns4buk/r	young bearded seal			bearded seal, young	seal (young bearded ~)								 
\f2\i Erignathus barbatus 
\f0\i0 (bearded seal) young			young bearded seal 
\f2\i (Erignathus barbatus)		
\f0\i0 < teghik-?-				teghigluk	teghigluk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1075 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \
teghigniigh-	ns4buy74-	hunt															to hunt		< teghik-niigh-				teghignigh-	teghignxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
teghigniqe-	ns4buyb2s-	fun (have ~)		teghigniquq \'91he\'92s having fun; enjoying something\'92 / teghigniqutkaa \'91he's enjoying it\'92	enjoy something												to have fun; to enjoy something		< teghig-neq-liqe-				teghigniqe-	teghigniqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
teghigsigh-	ns4b[cb4-	sing a song to attract game (of a shaman)															to sing a song to attract game (of a shaman)		< teghik-sigh-		CK A & W 124		teghigsigh-	teghigsigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
teghiigh-	ns474-	pursue (of dogs pursuing an animal)															to pursue (of dogs pursuing an animal)		< teghik-(ng)igh- (?)				teghigh-	teghxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1271 -\
teghik, teghigaq	ns4br. ns4buf2	game animal (sea or land, not birds)		Ugingan meghem teghikusaa tamaghhaan unakaqegkanga. Uksungagu nunivagem 
\f2\i teghiga
\f0\i0  unakaqegkanga. \'91Her husband caught all the 
\f2\i animals
\f0\i0  of the sea. When winter came he caught the game animals of the tundra.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 43)													game animal (sea or land, not birds)		PE t03i!				teghik, teghigaq	teghik, teghigaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1082 , \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
teghikusaq	ns4brecz2	animal (including game animal and dog)															animal (including game animal and dog)		< teghik-?-				teghikusaq	teghikusaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
teghingyug-	ns4b3]/u-	enjoy (suddenly start to ~ oneself)		yuuk napinghinnaqngwaaghluni aghulaquutaghtaquyatata qenwat teghingyugluni ellngallu aghulaqumalghii \'91a man wasn\'92t going hunting at first, but when the others all left, he wanted to go too for the fun, so he too went to go hunting\'92													to suddenly start to enjoy oneself				CK A & W 125		teghingyug-	teghingyug-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
teghla	ns4kz	owl		
\f2\i Chukotkan; Teghlam
\f0\i0  tuguluku ellngaasitaq, uugtuq uyghagmun, taagken kuuvaa ellngaasitaq. Maateghhaq meteghlluk tagneghtaa. 'The 
\f2\i owl
\f0\i0  took the container of oily sooty lamp residue, got up on the rock, and then poured it forth. Now the raven became all black.' (AANGHHAQ 28) 	snow owl	
\f2\i Nyctea scandiaca							
\f0\i0 check what specific type of owl, or if a general term				owl; snowy owl 
\f2\i (Nyctea scandiaca)		
\f0\i0 from Chukchi t0q0l \'91Arctic owl\'92	01, 14			teghla	teghla	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1103 \
teghleg-	ns4ksu-	fastened securely over something		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  teghlegtaa 'he fastened it securely over something' / teghlegngaaq 'it is fastened securely over something'									taghlugte- in Rub 483				fastened securely over something						teghleg-	teghleg-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\

\f1\b teghlug-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ns4k/u-\super \'a1	\nosupersub land from the sea onto the beach		teghlugtuq 'it landed' / teghlukan 'if it lands'													to land from the sea onto the beach						teghlug-1	teghlug-1	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub teghlug-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ns4keu-\super \'99	\nosupersub escape under ice (of a struck sea mammal)		unangkaqa teghlugtaa pinaqinaamaluku \'91the seal I hit went under the ice just as I was trying to get it\'92													to escape under ice (of a struck sea mammal)				CK A & W 125		teghlug-2	teghlug-2	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1091 \u1075 -\super 2\
\nosupersub teghlugte-	ns4k/[ns-	roll one's eyes upwards		teghlugtuq 'he rolled his eyes upwards' / teghlugtekan 'if he rolls his eyes'; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tegh-													to roll one's eyes upwards						teghlugte-	teghlugte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
teghqig-	ns52bu-	wipe anal area		teghqigtuq 'he wiped his (own) anal area'; teghqigaa 'he wiped his (another's) anal area' /													to wipe anal area		< teq-?-				teghqig-	teghqig-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1075 -\
teghqiisghaq	ns527c4f2	toilet paper			gun wad												toilet paper; gun wad		< teghqig-?-				teghqisghaq	teghqxsghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1251 \u1089 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
teghqilkak	ns52bk]rfr	wheatear		
\f2\i these two very different appearing birds have the same name	Oenanthe oenanthe	
\f0\i0 brant								
\f2\i Branta bernicia			
\f0\i0 wheatear 
\f2\i (Oenanthe oenanthe); 
\f0\i0 brant 
\f2\i (Branta bernicia)				
\f0\i0 SLI Cur. Man. 55, 56		teghqilkak	teghqilkak	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \
teghrughaaq	ns4he462	part between the flukes in the tail of a whale															the "v"-shaped part between the flukes in the tail of a whale		< teq-?-				teghrughaq	teghrughxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \
teghrughte-	ns4he5ns-	double or shorten a rope by looping it over something, threading the end through the loop and tightening it		sayughqusini taaqluku tugumavigkun teghrughutaa \'91when he was done with the motor starter rope, he tied it loosely it over the handle\'92	tie loosely												to double or shorten a rope by looping it over something, threading the end through the loop and tightening it; to tie loosely		< teq-?-		CK A & W 125		teghrughte-	teghrughte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
teghrughutilleq	ns4he4enbk]s2	lark\'92s head knot															lark\'92s head knot		< teghrughte-(u)te-i\super 1\nosupersub -lleq\super 1		\nosupersub SLI Cur. Res. Manual 120		teghrughutilleq	teghrughutilleq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
teghruq	ns4he2	nail puller of a hammer		teghrulek repa naagu \'91where is the hammer with a nail puller\'92; whaken teghrulegmeng iikigu \'91take it off with this claw hammer\'92													nail puller of a hammer		< teq-?		CK A & W 125		teghruq	teghruq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1179 \
teghsagh-	ns5cz4-	awaken (him)		teghsaghaa \'91he woke him up\'92 / teghsanqegtuq \'91he is easy to wake up\'92; = taghsagh-	wake (him) up												to awaken (him); to wake (him) up		< tegh-?-				teghsagh-	teghsagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
teghtugh-	ns5ne4-	wake up		teghtughtuq \'91he woke up\'92 / teghtughtaa \'91he woke him up\'92; = taghtugh-													to wake up		< tegh-?-				teghtugh-	teghtugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
teghuq	ns4e2	fleshy part of bird\'92s tail		ghhiitalghiini papekullutii taakut teghut aliighaqut \'91when plucking bird\'92s tail feathers, the fleshy part appears\'92; 
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  teghuk, 
\f2\i for the notch of the arrow	
\f0\i0 notch in end of arrow												fleshy part of bird\'92s tail; notch in end of arrow		PY t03u		CK A & W 125		teghuq	teghuq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 \
tegleg-	nsuksu-	steal		teglegtuq \'91he stole\'92; teglegaa \'91he stole it\'92 / teglegvikaa \'91he stole from her or it\'92													to steal		PE t0!l0!-				tegleg-	tegleg-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 -\
teglengsaak	nsuks3c9r	thief															thief		< tegleg-?-				teglengsak	teglengsxk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
tegtaan	ns[n6y	working together		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  tegtaan angyateng sayugteghaqeftiit \'91it appears that they are all together pulling their boat\'92													working together				CK A & W 125		tegtan	tegtxn	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1085 \
tegyuughiite-	nsum047ns-	hesitant (not be ~ to express one\'92s thoughts)		tegyuughiilnguut sameng piyuneghmeggni legan pimaghmeng ayuqelghiit llangaqa sumeghtaghaghpenateng \'91when those that don\'92t hesitate to say anything want to say anything, they just do it, kind of like without thinking\'92	daring (be ~)	outspoken (be ~)											to not be hesitant to express one\'92s thoughts; to be outspoken; to be daring						tegyughite-	tegyxghxte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tekagh-	nsrf4-	erection (have an ~)		of humans and animals; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tegge-													to have an erection		PY t0(k)ka3- (under PE t0!0!-)				tekagh-	tekagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tekaghreketiigh-	nsrf4hsrsn74-	flow continuously from small opening in the lower part of container		mesiilghutak ukifkalleghqun tekaghreketiighaqeftuk \'91the fuel tank was leaking out liquid through the hole punctured in it\'92; angyam mellukutaa iiksaqminigu meq tekaghrekitiightuq \'91when the plug on the boat was removed (one could see that) water started to squirt through\'92									check, explained as: esnighalghiistun maaqilghii, which VK glosses as above				to continuously flow from small opening in the lower part of container		< tekagh-?-		A&W 125, Rub 514		tekaghreketigh-	tekaghreketxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1088 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1251 \u1271 -\
Tekeghaghwaaq	Nsrs4f4162	Powooiliak Bay (point on ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 point on Powooiliak Bay  on St. Lawrence Is.				CK		Tekeghaghwaq	Tekeghaghwxq	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
Tekeghapak	Nsrs4fgfr	Tikaghapuk Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91large (?) point\'92; 
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Tikaghapuk Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		< tekeghaq-?				Tekeghapak	Tekeghapak	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
tekeghaq	nsrs4f2	projection of land into water			point of land												projection of land into water; point of land		< tekeq-ghaq; PE t0k03a3 (under PE t0k03)				tekeghaq	tekeghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
Tekeghaq	Nsrs4f2	Tikugha Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Tikugha Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		< tekeq-ghaq				Tekeghaq	Tekeghaq	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tekeghin	nsrs4by	promonitory jutting out from an ice field		
\f2\i see item 79 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												promonitory jutting out from an ice field		< tekeghaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -(u)n				tekeghin	tekeghin	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \
tekeghmigun	nsrs4vbuey	knob on shaft of ivory on small harpoon or spear to which line from harpoon/spear head is attached											
\f2\i see Harpoon Parts in Appendix				
\f0\i0 knob on shaft of ivory on small harpoon or spear to which line from harpoon/spear head is attached		< tekeq-mik-(u)n				tekeghmigun	tekeghmigun	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
tekeghregagh-	nsrs4hsuf4-	poke around with the index finger		qavaanayukan tawavek tekeregaghyaqminigu teghhumaftuq \'91he poked him to see if he might be sleeping, but he was awake\'92; tekeregaghluku naasiighaa natennayukayek imakek meghutem \'91he put his finger in the can and tasted it to make sure it was not bad\'92													to poke around with the index finger		< tekeq-?-		CK A & W 126		tekeghregagh-	tekeghregagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tekelek	nsrsksr	talented sewer			sewer who sews a lot												one who sews a lot; talented sewer		< tekeq-lek				tekelek	tekelek	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
tekeq	nsrs2	index finger			finger (index ~)	thimble											index finger; thimble		PE t0k03				tekeq	tekeq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \
tekerqaq	nsrsi2f2	point			protrusion	outer corner											point; protrusion; outer corner		< tekeq-?-				tekerqaq	tekerqaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1096 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
tekeyiighaq	nsrsq74f2	arctic tern			tern, arctic	
\f2\i Sterna paradisaea											
\f0\i0 arctic tern (Sterna paradisaea)		PY t0kiyaq				tekeyighaq	tekeyxghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1253 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tekghaghte-	nsr5f5ns-	swept backwards due to the speed at which something is moving (be ~)		nasaperaan uyataa tekghaghtuq sukeram angtalanganeng \'91he was going so fast that the string on his hat was swept backwards\'92													to be swept backwards due to the speed at which something is moving				CK A & W 126		tekghaghte-	tekghaghte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tekiina	nsr7yf	four (the number ~ in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 tekeq
\f2\i ; the entire jingle is:
\f0\i0  aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'	counting jingle (the number \'91four\'92 in a ~ or finger naming jingle for children)	jingle (the number \'91four\'92 in a counting or finger naming ~ for children)											the number four (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)						tekina	tekxna	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \
tekin	nsrby	middle pole of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 middle pole of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)				CK Rub 514		tekin	tekin	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \
tekiqe-	nsrb2s-	find (it, garment) to be too small		kameraangluni tekiqsamikek naavghusaghtuumakek angelghiignun \'91he got a pair of boots, and it was too small for him, so he went back and traded it in for a bigger pair\'92; amiiqaq niightughyaghluku niillghek tekiqaak \'91they tried stretching a walrus hide, but the stretching frame was too small\'92	small (find (it, garment) to be too ~)												to find (it, garment) to be too small				CK A & W 126		tekiqe-	tekiqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tekite-, tekiite-	nsrbns-. nsr7ns-	land (of something thrown, not of birds or planes)		tekituq \'91it landed\'92; tekitaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tekitfikaa \'91it landed on it\'92 / 
\f2\i Tekisami
\f0\i0  tipelem qaaynganilngughqun sagneghegneng neghumalghii neqekrangllameng. \'91When he (the lazy mouse) 
\f2\i landed
\f0\i0  on the top of the table he ate the bread from the plate.\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 6); Iqulunga aqsamkun 
\f2\i tekitunga
\f0\i0 . \'91I fell and 
\f2\i landed
\f0\i0  on my stomach.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 33)	hit the ground												to land (of something thrown, not of birds or planes); to hit						tekite-, tekite-	tekite-, tekxte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -, \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tekranpak	nsrifygfr	strong person		amsakaghtapigesnaghhaguq taana yuggaq tekranpaggaaguq \'91that little man there is a strong person\'92; tamaakut amsakaghtat palaqegpenaki tekranpaguut \'91don\'92t underestimate those who are small, they are strong\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tegge-													strong person				CK A & W 126		tekranpak	tekranpak	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1085 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
tekruqaq	nsrie2f2	lump or hard spot in flesh		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tegge-													lump or hard spot in flesh						tekruqaq	tekruqaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
telaananga	nsk9yf3f	sail															sail		from Chukchi t0lana&, pl. t0lana&at \'91means of travel or conveyance\'92 or t0lene& \'91sail\'92	14			telananga	telxnanga	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \
telaananga-	nsk9yf3f-	sail															to sail						telananga-	telxnanga-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 -\
telaaypa	nsk9qgf	snare		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 trap												snare; trap		probably from English \'91trap\'92	SLI Chuk.	R515		telaypa	telxypa	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1253 \u1087 \u1072 \
telenwinanga	nsksy1byf3f	saw (cutting tool)		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 saw (cutting tool)		from Chukchi t0n0lwena&, pl. t0n0lwena&at \'91saw\'92	14			telenwinanga	telenwinanga	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1085 \u1265 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \

\f1\b tema\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nsvf\super s	\nosupersub torso		aghneghet puuneghmeggni temangit samantaqut meghmi \'91when whales surface for air, their bodies are under water\'92; qamiyem nalighneghqek ayemqughlutek naqam temkek pinightuk \'91part of a sled broke, but the body is good\'92	body	relative, close								basic part of object			torso; body; close relative; basic part of object		PE t0m0		CK Rub 515 on gloss 4		temae	temae	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
temeghnagh-	nsvs4yf4-	cure (try to ~ illness through ritual)															to try to cure illness through ritual		< tema-?-		CK A & W 126, Rub 516		temeghnagh-	temeghnagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
temeghnaghta	nsvs4yf5nf	healer (ritual ~)		ayumiq alignalghiit yuget temeghnaghtenguluki aaptaqiit \'91long ago, they would count on shamans as ritual healers\'92													ritual healer		< temeghnagh-(s)ta		CK A & W 126, Rub 516		temeghnaghta	temeghnaghta	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
temeghte-	nsvs5ns-	cut into the flesh when skinning a carcass															to cut into the flesh when skinning a carcass		< tema-?-				temeghte-	temeghte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
temitenge-	nsvbns3s-	sympathize with a loved one who is ill or in trouble															to sympathize with a loved one who is ill or in trouble						temitenge-	temitenge-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 -\
temkae	nsvrfs	hummock		temketuqaq \'91hummocky ground\'92; quyngit temkenginaghqun pangalwaaghtut \'91the caribou are running around only on the ground that is all hummocks\'92	tussock												hummock; tussock		from Chukchi t0mk0t \'91hummock\'92	14			temkae	temkae	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1099 \
temkak, temkaak	nsvrfr. nsvr6r	pants (men's outer ~ of sealskin with hair side out, worn over inner pants of reindeer skin)		
\f2\i this is a dual; the singular would be 
\f0\i0 temkaq
\f2\i  or 
\f0\i0 temkaq* 
\f2\i (same as the name for the
\f0\i0  seal)													men's outer pants of sealskin with hair side out, worn over inner pants of reindeer skin		< temkaq-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 temkak, temkak	temkak, temkxk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1082 , \u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u257 \u1082 \
temkaq	nsvrf2	spotted seal, old			ring seal, old	seal, ring or spotted, old								
\f2\i Phoca largha
\f0\i0  (spotted seal) or 
\f2\i Phoca hispada 
\f0\i0 (ring seal), old			old spotted seal 
\f2\i (Phoca largha)
\f0\i0  
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ring seal 
\f2\i (Phoca hispada)		
\f0\i0 PY t0mkaq (under PE t0m0); < tema-? (?)				temkaq	temkaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
temkasegaq	nsvrfcsuf2	piece of sealskin		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 sealskin, piece								check to see if used on SLI				piece of sealskin	kjcren jn ythgbxmtq irehs	< temkaq-?		Rub. 515		temkasegaq	temkasegaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
temkawaa	nsvrf16	ball		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); questioned	
\f0\i0 mass												ball; mass				Rub. 515		temkawa	temkawx	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1082 \u1072 \u1265 \u257 \
temli-	nsvkb-	talk in sleep		temliiq \'91walked in his sleep\'92	sleepwalk	walk in sleep											to sleepwalk; to talk in sleep		PE 0t0mli- (under PE 0t03-)		CK V & E 172 (3rd gloss)		temli-	temli-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1083 \u1080 -\
temlilleq	nsvk7k]s2	seam on the front shin part of a boot		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 seam on the front shin part of a boot				CK Rub 515		temlilleq	temlilleq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1083 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
temngi	nsv3b	reason (for no real or particular ~)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  temngi laalightaagunga \'91I just dropped by for no particular reason\'92; temngi legan kakimakanga \'91she just sewed it up any old way\'92	any old way	without plan or forethought											for no real or particular reason; any old way; without plan or forethought		from Chukchi t0m&i \'91for no real reason, just like that, in vain\'92				temngi	temngi	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1187 \u1080 \
temngingu-	nsv3b3e-	nonsense (be ~)			foolish (be ~)												to be nonsense; to be foolish		< temngi-(ng)u-				temngingu-	temngingu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1187 \u1080 \u1187 \u1091 -\
temngitwha-	nsv3bn1]f-	waste time			act wastefully	lies (spread ~)											to act wastefully; to spread lies; to waste time		from Chukchi t0m&etwak \'91be without occupation, be idle\'92	14			temngitwha-	temngitwha-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1265 \u1100 \u1072 -\
temsiyaaghagh-	nsvcb94f4-	smile faintly wanting to laugh but suppressing it		temsiyaaghaghtuq \'91he is smiling faintly\'92 / temsiyaaghaataa \'91he is smiling faintly at him\'92; temsiyaaghaatkaa \'91he is smiling faintly about it\'92													to smile faintly wanting to laugh but suppressing it		PE t0mci-				temsiyaghagh-	temsiyxghagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tenema	nsysvf	cause of something		nazighaghsiq aqlagham tenemenga \'91February is the beginning of the cold\'92; sukilpaam tenemenga taakwanteftuq naaygham gginaani \'91at that time auklets begin to be present on the face of the mountain\'92	beginning												cause of something; beginning		from Chukchi ?	x			tenema	tenema	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \
tengaa-	ns36-	fly around		tengaaguq \'91it flew around\'92 /													to fly around		< tenge-?-				tenga-	tengx-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u257 -\
tengaasta	ns36cnf	pilot															pilot		< tengaa-(s)ta				tengasta	tengxsta	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u257 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \

\f1\b tenga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ns3f\super s	\nosupersub pubic hair			hair, pubic												pubic hair		PE t0&0				tengae	tengae	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
Tengagergen	Ns3fushusy	god figure in Chukotkan stories		Ayumiq aapghaqaat angeghllalghii ighaleqetaaghllak aghtaghaam tunganganilnguq aatgha 
\f2\i Tengagergen
\f0\i0 . \'85 Whangkutanguq 
\f2\i Tengagergem
\f0\i0  ulimaaqeftiinkut. \'91Long ago they used to speak of a huge star that appeared before dawn; its name was 
\f2\i Tengagergen
\f0\i0 . \'85 They\'92d say that 
\f2\i Tengagergem
\f0\i0  created us.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 44)													god figure in Chukotkan stories		from Chukchi t0&a!0r!0n \'91dawn, daybreak, growth\'92				tengagergen	tengagergen	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1075 \u1099 \u1088 \u1075 \u1099 \u1085 \
tengayuk	ns3f/r	decoration (as on drum) of long hairs from throat of reindeer or caribou															decoration (as on drum) of long hairs from throat of reindeer or caribou		< tenga-?; PE t0&ayu! (under PE t0&0)				tengayuk	tengayuk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \
tenge-	ns3s-	fly (off)		tenguq \'91it took off\'92 / tengtaa \'91it (the wind) blew it away\'92; tengutaa \'91he took off with it (airplane) or with her (fellow traveler, passenger)\'92	take off in flight												to take off in flight; to fly (off)		PE t0&0-				tenge-	tenge-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 -\
tengegkayuk	ns3s[rf/r	airplane		
\f2\i a Gambell (and Chukotkan) word; also plural,
\f0\i0  tengegkayuget
\f2\i , for one airplane; 
\f0\i0 tengegkayuget tengut \'91the airplane(s) took off\'92; tengegkayuget nalugtut \'91the airplane(s) landed\'92; Weni 
\f2\i tengegkayuklu
\f0\i0  kaataghsagutuq. Mail-engyagutukutlu utaqlighllagpenaamta. \'91And then 
\f2\i the airplane
\f0\i0  started arriving more often. We began to get mail without having to wait for a long time.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:56); Sivulighmi nekeftelleghmi saama tengaastengi 
\f2\i tengegkayuget
\f0\i0 , kiyaghsimaak maalghuk Amerikaghmi uyughakek Rayt. 'The first to build an 
\f2\i airplane
\f0\i0  for sustained flight were two Americans, the Wright brothers.' (NATEN YUUK 18); = tengkayuk													airplane		< tenge-kayuk				tengegkayuk	tengegkayuk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \
tengengaaghaq	ns3s364f2	bird, young, ready to fly															young bird ready to fly		< tenge-?-				tengengaghaq	tengengxghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1187 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tengertaq	ns3sinf2	puree, chilled, of boiled fish, broth and seal oil			dish of chilled puree of boiled fish, broth and seal oil												chilled puree of boiled fish, broth and seal oil						tengertaq	tengertaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1096 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tengghu-	ns34e-	enthusiastic		
\f2\i emotional root; 
\f0\i0 tengghuyugtuq \'91he is enthusiastic\'92; tengghukaa \'91he is enthusiastic about it\'92; tengghunaghtuq \'91it makes one enthusiastic\'92													enthusiastic		PY t0&3u-				tengghu-	tengghu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 -\
tengghuniqe-	ns34eyb2s-	fun (have ~)															to have fun		< tengghu-neq-liqe-				tengghuniqe-	tengghuniqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tengilghaaghqe-	ns3bk4652s-	make dust or debris fly around		aghuliightek mallaq tengilghaaghqaghsi \'91stop, you all are making the dust fly around\'92; sukilpaq tamaa naghuyam tengelghaaghqaa \'91the sea gulls are making the auklets  fly off\'92	cause many birds to fly off												to make dust or debris fly around; to cause many birds to fly off				CK A & W 127		tengilghaghqe-	tengilghxghqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tengkayuk	ns3rf/r	airplane		
\f2\i a Savoonga word; also plural,
\f0\i0  tengkayuget
\f2\i , for one airplane; 
\f0\i0 tengegkayuget tengut \'91the airplane(s) took off\'92; tengkayuget nalugtut \'91the airplane(s) landed\'92; = tengegkayuk													airplane		< tenge-kayuk				tengkayuk	tengkayuk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \
tenglepegragh-	ns3ksgsuhf4-	tap															to tap		< tenglug-?-ragh-				tenglepegragh-	tenglepegragh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tenglug-	ns3k/u-	punch with one's fist		tenglugaa \'91he punched him\'92 /													to punch with one's fist		PE t0&lu!(-)				tenglug-	tenglug-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -\
tenglugtugh-	ns3k/[ne4-	knock on the door															to knock on the door		< tenglug-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				tenglugtugh-	tenglugtugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
tengneq	ns3ys2	recluse		
\f2\i the spirit is rarely  seen, but does goes in anywhere (whereas a 
\f0\i0 tughneghaq
\f2\i  is said to only  go into clean houses)	
\f0\i0 spirit, lesser	savage											recluse; savage; lesser spirit	lbrbq xtkjdtr\\ lbrfhm			Rub. 517;   W. James		tengneq	tengneq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tengngaak	ns3]6r	deep hollow sound such as distant thunder		\'85 temngi 
\f2\i tengngaagtaghllequnga
\f0\i0  nalighmeng lengaaghtaghllequnga piniqinghilkuma. \'91\'85 just pointlessly I will be making 
\f2\i hollow thundering sounds
\f0\i0  or I will be making ringing noises (\'93I am become as 
\f2\i sounding brass
\f0\i0 , or a tinkling cymbal\'94) If I don\'92t have love.\'92 (1 Corinthians 13.1)	hollow deep sound	sound, hollow and deep											deep hollow sound such as distant thunder						tengngak	tengngxk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1100 \u257 \u1082 \
tengqalluk	ns32fk]/r	windy, wet weather with water blown about from the sea															windy, wet weather with water blown about from the sea		< tenge-?-lluk				tengqalluk	tengqalluk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
tengug-	ns3eu-	box (fight with fists)		yugek tengugutuk \'91the two men are boxing\'92	fight with fists												to box; to fight with fists						tengug-	tengug-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1075 -\
tenguk	ns3er	liver															liver		PE t0&u!				tenguk	tenguk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1082 \
tenguqe-	ns3e2s-	strain (as when defecating or giving birth)															to strain (as when defecating or giving birth)		PY t0&uq0-				tenguqe-	tenguqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tengutkalek	ns3enrfksr	very person that got something		tengutkalek naangusaqunaan salin neghigatuq \'91don\'92t finish it, the person (who made it) hasn\'92t eaten yet\'92; wiin ayvelek utaqateggu, enankin tengutkalgulghii \'91wait for the person who got the walrus, after all, he\'92s the one who got it\'92													the very person that got something				CK A & W 127		tengutkalek	tengutkalek	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
tengvi	ns3db	wrongly		
\f2\i particle, apparently occuring only with certain (Yupik) endings: 
\f0\i0 tengvimun \'91in the wrong direction, against the grain\'92: tengvimun amiiram melqwi qigughiit \'91they remove the hair from an animal hide by scraping against the grain\'92; tengvimun qikmim melqwa mesuunaa \'91he combed the dog's fur the wrong way\'92; 
\f2\i also, 
\f0\i0 tengvimteggun \'91in as much as we acted wrong socially\'92: 
\f2\i Tengvimteggun
\f0\i0 , whangallu ilataghtekaagunga. 
\f2\i Tengvimteggun
\f0\i0  aga ii-i qayughllak alingesluta qeleghluta. \'91In as much as we misbehaved, I too had joined in. We 
\f2\i misbehaved
\f0\i0  and therefore they put fear into us, chastising us.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:20)	opposite												wrongly; opposite		from Chukchi tinm0- \'91wrongly, at wrong moment\'92				tengvimun	tengvimun	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1187 \u1074 \u1080 \
tenmaawi-	nsyv61b-	accustomed to something (become ~)		tenmaawiiq \'91he's grown used to something \'91/ tenmaawitaa \'91he's grown used to it\'92; = tinmaawi-													to become accustomed to something		from Chukchi tenmaw0k \'91prepare oneself\'92	14			tenmawi-	tenmxwi-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \u1084 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\

\f1\b tenpa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nsygf\super s	\nosupersub nailhead		tuquuqaq una tenpengituq \'91this nail has no head\'92; 
\f2\i this is a direct nominalization of
\f0\i0  tenpe-													nailhead				CK A & W 127		tenpae	tenpae	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \u1087 \u1072 \u1099 \
tenpe-	nsygs-	hit hard (not with the hand or fist)		tenpaa \'91he hit it hard\'92 / tenputaa \'91he hit it onto something\'92; tengegkayuget tenputut \'91the airplane crashed into something\'92	crash into								check deR.\'92s gloss \'91to pierce, spit, stick into, drive into\'92				to hit hard (not with the hand or fist); to crash into		from Chukchi t0np0k \'91break, pierce\'92	14			tenpe-	tenpe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \u1087 \u1099 -\
tenuupa	nsy8gf	silver fox		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 fox, silver	
\f2\i Vulpes fulva var.											
\f0\i0 silver fox
\f2\i  (Vulpes fulva var.)		
\f0\i0 from Chukchi \'93tinu\'92p\'94 'blue fox\'92	04, 14			tenupa	tenxpa	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \u1263 \u1087 \u1072 \
tepaan	nsg6y	ice that has drifted ashore or has been blown against solid ice		
\f2\i see item 80 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												ice that has drifted ashore or has been blown against solid ice		< tepe-?-(u)n				tepan	tepxn	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u257 \u1085 \

\f1\b tepa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nsgf\super s	\nosupersub odor		tepnga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tepanga \'91its smell\'92	smell (odor)	aroma											odor; smell; aroma	pfgf[	PE t0p0		CK V & E 133 (Russ voc)		tepae	tepae	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1099 \
tepaq	nsgf2	edible seashore life (such as a sea squirt; not an animal carcass)			seashore life, edible, found on beach (such as a sea squirt; not an animal carcass)												edible seashore life found on beach (such as a sea squirt; not an animal carcass)		PE t0p9a3 (under PE t0p0-); < tepe-aq				tepaq	tepaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \
tepe-	nsgs-	drift ashore		tepuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tepaa \'91it drifted ashore\'92 / Uupa elngaatall 
\f2\i tepaa
\f0\i0 . \'91Sea peaches are being 
\f2\i washed ashore 
\f0\i0 in quantity.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 161)	wash ashore												to drift ashore; to wash ashore		PE t0p0-				tepe-	tepe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 -\
tepelluk	nsgsk]/r	putrid smell			foul smell	stink								odor, bad			putrid smell; foul smell; stink; bad odor	lehyjq pfgf[	< tepa-lluk		CK V & E 133 (Russ voc)		tepelluk	tepelluk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
Tepetapetaghhaat	Nsgsnfgsnf56n	Okikak Mtn. (site northwest of ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site northwest of Okikak Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.						Tepetapetaghhat	Tepetapetaghhxt	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u257 \u1090 \
tepkegtaq	nsgrs[nf2	good aroma			aroma, good												good aroma	leibcnsq. fhjvfnysq	< tepa\super e\nosupersub -kegtaq		CK V & E 133 (Russ voc)		tepkegtaq	tepkegtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tepluk	nsgk]/r	wild celery		
\f2\i used as a medicinal herb 	
\f0\i0 celery, wild	
\f2\i Angelica lucida											
\f0\i0 wild celery (Angelica lucida)		< tepa\super e\nosupersub -lluk				tepluk	tepluk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
tepnaghuq	nsgy]f4e2	washed ashore (anything that has been ~)		esnighqwaghlunga tepnaghungunga iqeghtaqegtapigtuq \'91I went beach combing and found a piece of beached fossilized ivory with good coloring\'92	beached fossilized ivory	fossilized ivory, beached								ivory (beached fossilized ~)			anything that has been washed ashore; beached fossilized ivory		< tepe-?				tepnaghuq	tepnaghuq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 \u1091 \u1179 \
Tepraagek	Nsgi6usr	Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is. (site on ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		< ?-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 Tepragek	Teprxgek	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1087 \u1096 \u257 \u1075 \u1099 \u1082 \
tepraak	nsgi6r	smell, strange and bad															strange bad smell		< tepa\super e\nosupersub -raak				teprak	teprxk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1096 \u257 \u1082 \
teptaakrak	nsgn6rifr	eulochon			
\f2\i Thaleichthys pacificus												
\f0\i0 eulachon 
\f2\i (Thaleichthys pacificus)		
\f0\i0 < tepe-?-		SLI Cur. Man. 53		teptakrak	teptxkrak	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1090 \u257 \u1082 \u1096 \u1072 \u1082 \
teptaaqe-	nsgn62s-	tie something with a string and a stick on which to wrap the end of the string back and forth to hold it in place															to tie something with a string and a stick on which to wrap the end of the string back and forth to hold it in place		PE tap0t-\super 1\nosupersub  (under PE tap03(-))		CK Nagai		teptaqe-	teptxqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 -\
teq	ns2	anus		Quutmeng awavaqaanlluteng 
\f2\i teghhakun
\f0\i0  tuutkat, \'85 \'91A short way from shore it [the ice floe] hit on the 
\f2\i bottom
\f0\i0  [of the water] (i.e. ran aground), \'85\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:122)	bottom												anus; bottom		PE 0t03				teq	teq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \
teqlighaq	ns2k]b4f2	last one		kayalqiiraaghullghiini teqlighagpenateng pimalghiit \'91in the competition, they did not place at very bottom the bottom\'92	lowest one	bottom (the very ~)											the very last and lowest one; the very bottom		< teq-qliq-ghaq		CK A & W 127, Rub 514		teqlighaq	teqlighaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tequq	ns2e2	urine		tequghpagnituq \'91it smells of urine\'92													urine		PE 0t0qu3				tequq	tequq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \

\f1\b teraama\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nsh6vf\super s	\nosupersub drum (oil ~)		
\f2\i also dual, 
\f0\i0 teraamek,
\f2\i  for one
\f0\i0  
\f2\i drum; also used in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 oil drum	tank											drum; oil drum; tank		from English \'91drum\'92	SLI Chuk.	V&E94; R518		teramae	terxmae	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
terangiq	nshf3b2	warm weather in winter		terangiqagu angyaghnaghlleqaa \'91when it gets warm (during winter), it will be good for boating\'92													warm weather in winter				CK A & W 127		terangiq	terangiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1179 \
terateriiq	nshfnsh72	dunlin			sandpiper (rock ~_	rock sandpiper								
\f2\i Calidris alpina 
\f0\i0 or
\f2\i  ptilocnemis			
\f0\i0 dunlin (Calidris alpina); rock sandpiper (Calidris ptilocnemis)		PE t09at09a(C)i3				terateriq	teraterxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1251 \u1179 \
teregh-	nshs4-	mark with a line			line (make a ~ on something)												to mark with a line; to make a line on something		PE t0t03-				teregh-	teregh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 -\
terelleq	nshsk]s2	line		Aghviqakun aagluni ayuquq 
\f2\i terilleq
\f0\i0 . \'91The 
\f2\i boundary
\f0\i0  (between Russia and the US) is just a matter of going over the International Date Line.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 142)	boundary												line; boundary		< teregh-lleq				terelleq	terelleq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
tereq	nshs2	mark		
\f2\i Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0 terghet \'91cheek tatoo(s)\'92	line	tatoo											mark; line; tatoo						tereq	tereq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1179 \
terghii-	nsh47-	touch slightly when shooting or throwing at something 		unangkani terghiiluku unguvaastaqaq nangteghluku tuqusimakanga \'91he finished off killing the seal that he had just grazed\'92	graze (touch lightly)												to touch slightly when shooting or throwing at something rather than gettting an exact hit; to graze		< tereq-?-		CK A & W 127		terghi-	terghx-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1271 \u1251 -\
terqaq	nsi2f2	board with a groove in it											used for what ?				board with a groove in it		< tereq-?-				terqaq	terqaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1096 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
terqitaak	nsi2bn6r	squeaky sound like fingers in wet hair or someone gritting his teeth															squeaky sound like fingers in wet hair or someone gritting his teeth						terqitak	terqitxk	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1096 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1082 \
terugi-	nsheub-	draw		terugiiq \'91he is drawing\'92; terugii \'91he is drawing it\'92 /													to draw		perhaps from English \'91draw\'92, if not from Yupik tereq (q.v.)	SLI			terugi-	terugi-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 -\
terugista	nsheubcnf	illustrator															illustrator		< terugi-(s)ta				terugista	terugista	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
tesakemna	nsczrsvyf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  sakemna																			tesakemna	tesakemna	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
tesamna	nsczvyf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0   saamna																			tesamna	tesamna	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
teskana	nscrfyf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0   kaana																			teskana	teskana	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \
teskiwna	nscrb1yf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0   kiiwna																			teskiwna	teskiwna	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1082 \u1080 \u1265 \u1085 \u1072 \
tespagna	nscgfuyf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0   paagna																			tespagna	tespagna	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
tespamna	nscgfvyf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0   paamna																			tespamna	tespamna	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1087 \u1072 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
tespikna	nscgbry]f			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0   piikna																			tespikna	tespikna	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \
tesqagna	nsc2fuyf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0   qaagna																			tesqagna	tesqagna	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
tesqakemna	nsc2frsvyf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0   qakemna																			tesqakemna	tesqakemna	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
tesqamna	nsc2fvyf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0   qaamna														nfv dyenhb ;bkbof			CK V & E 115 (russian vocab)		tesqamna	tesqamna	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1084 \u1085 \u1072 \
tesqawna	nsc2f1yf			
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0   qaawma																			tesqawna	tesqawna	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1265 \u1085 \u1072 \
tetagh-	nsnf4-	mark at an exact point for cutting		pilalghiit aghveghmeng sivukluku tetaghteghluku ungughtelighluteng tetagheghqun makreghqughaqluku \'91the people butchering the whale  first marked exactly where to cut, and then cut the piece off with the help of the one\'92s pulling\'92													to mark at an exact point for cutting				CK A & W 128		tetagh-	tetagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
teteghaq	nsns4f2	marker (sharpened piece of ivory used to mark wood for cutting)		teteghaghaqluku unaghsighllak quupumakanga \'91he marked the big piece of wood with a sharp piece of ivory and he cut it\'92													marker (sharpened piece of ivory used to mark wood for cutting)				CK A & W 128		teteghaq	teteghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tetug-	nsneu-	reluctant to ask (be ~)		Apeghtughistesi tetugpenaki aaptaqiteki sangwat liigikenghinneghpesiki \'91don\'92t hesitate to ask to the schoolteacher if you don\'92t understand something; tetugtaatmineng sameng piighaghtiigalnguq \'91due to reluctance to ask for things, he doesn\'92t do things immediately\'92	hesitate to ask	bashful (be ~)											to be reluctant to ask; to hesitate to ask; to be bashful				CK A & W 128		tetug-	tetug-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 -\
teve-	nsds-	go over a hill		tevuq \'91he went over\'92; tevaa \'91he went over it\'92 / teftaa \'91he draped it over something\'92	overflow												to go over a hill; to overflow		PE 0t0v0(t)-				teve-	teve-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
tevegh-	nsds4-	stiff (be ~ (of arm, leg, etc.))		ighunga teggusighngalghii qapragmun tevepigtuq \'91his leg is splinted, so it is stiff\'92													to be stiff (of arm, leg, etc.)				CK A & W 128		tevegh-	tevegh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 -\
Tevelquk	Nsdsk]2er	saddle between Yaghmelngak Mtn. and Olnooseenuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 saddle between Yaghmelngak Mtn. and Olnooseenuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.						Tevelquk	Tevelquk	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \
Tevelqum Naayghaa	Nsdsk]2ev Y6q46	Myghapowit Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is. (mountain slightly to the east of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 mountain slightly to the east of Myghapowit Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		< tevelquq-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + naayghaq-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxn	Tevelqum Naygha	Tevelqum Nxyghx	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084  \u1053 \u257 \u1253 \u1271 \u257 \
Tevetleq	Nsdsnk]s2	Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is. (site on ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.						Tevetleq	Tevetleq	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 \u1090 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
tevigh-	nsdb4-	set (of sun or moon)		tevightuq \'91it set\'92 / Maaten ilangani iiwen siqineq 
\f2\i tevighyaghtughaquq
\f0\i0  qemimeng agigsalghiimi kana neghllak esghaamakanga. \'91One day as the the sun 
\f2\i was setting
\f0\i0  she peeked over a hill and saw a large village.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 158)													to set (of sun or moon)		PE t0vi3-				tevigh-	tevigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 -\
teviitaq	nsd7nf2	youth who starts to \'93go over\'94 the stretched gymnastic rope in competitions and is celebrated for this		tevyaaghsuwhaaghem quyasii teviitaq \'91one who is just starting to go over the ropes uses the celebration for happiness\'92													youth who starts to \'93go over\'94 the stretched gymnastic rope in competitions and is celebrated for this		< teve-?		CK A & W 128		tevitaq	tevxtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Tevleghak	Nsdks4fr	Tiflighak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Tiflighak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		< teve-leghagh-
\f2\i dual				
\f0\i0 Tevleghak	Tevleghak	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1082 \
Tevlighaq	Nsdkb4f2	Chechekuyem Strait in Chukotka (site on the Itegran Is. side of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on the Itegran Is. side of Chechekuyem Strait in Chukotka				CK		Tevlighaq	Tevlighaq	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tevlun	nsdk/y	gunnel, banded		
\f2\i exact identification uncertain, might be either fish or both	
\f0\i0 banded gunnel (fish)	
\f2\i Pholis fasciata								Rhodymenichthys dolichogaster			
\f0\i0 banded gunnel 
\f2\i (Pholis fasciata)  or 
\f0\i0 stippled gunnel 
\f2\i (Rhodymenichthys dolichogaster)
\f0\i0  				SLI Cur. Res. Man. 		tevlun	tevlun	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1102 \u1085 \
tevluq	nsdke2	rapids		iqalluget tevlumi ghhataqaghluteng alpakayuget \'91fish would have to jump over the rapids and steep gradients to get through\'92; kiiwem ilangi tevlughtuqat ilangan tevlii uusqaghaqluteng \'91some rivers have a lot of rapids, and some of their gradients are really steep\'92	drop in a river												rapids; steep gradient in a river				CK A & W 128		tevluq	tevluq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1083 \u1091 \u1179 \
tevneq	nsdys2	loop on a rope		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 one loop on a rope				CK Rub 513		tevneq	tevneq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
Tevnga	Nsd3f	portage route from Kange Camp (Kangii) across neck of land to south side of St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 portage route from Kange Camp (Kangii) across neck of land to south side of St. Lawrence Is.						Tevnga	Tevnga	\uc0\u1058 \u1099 \u1074 \u1187 \u1072 \
tevragh-	nsdhf4-	hunt seals on ice		tevraghnaluni qakiqniqaqeftuq \'91he is planning on going seal-hunting\'92	seal-hunt												to hunt seals on ice						tevragh-	tevragh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tevraq	nsdhf2	hunter on the sea ice															hunter on the sea ice						tevraq	tevraq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
tevugha-	nsde4f-	overflow		qaltagni unillukek takuyaqminikek enmis tevughaaqeftuk \'91he left his bucket and when he came back for it, it was overflowing\'92; qagit sama qaasqameng tevughaluteng llighumaat \'91the waves down at the west beach are now flowing over the bank\'92													to overflow		< teve-?-		CK A & W 128		tevugha-	tevugha-	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 -\
tevyaghaq	nsd]z4f2	mountain pass		igleghtat tevumaat tevyaghaq \'91the travelers went over the pass\'92	pass (mountain ~)												moutain pass		< teve-yaghaq		CK Rub 513		tevyaghaq	tevyaghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1099 \u1074 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b tiguynga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nbueq3f\super s\'99	\nosupersub wick adjuster for seal oil lamp			stick or antler piece used for spreading out an old garment as a doormat over snow at door of house												wick adjuster for seal oil lamp; stick or antler piece used for spreading out an old garment as a doormat over snow at door of house		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 499		tiguyngae	tiguyngae	\uc0\u1090 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1253 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 2\
tiig-	n7u-	peel a layer off of something		tiigtuq \'91he peeled off a layer from something, removed his outer garment\'92; tiigaa \'91he peeled a layer off of it, removed his (someone else's) outer garment\'92 / tiigutuq \'91he peeled off layers, removed layers of clothing\'92	remove outer garment												to peel a layer off of something; to remove outer garment		cf. PI taak- \'91split into layers\'92, which should perhaps be PE				tig-	txg-	\uc0\u1090 \u1251 \u1075 -\
tiigghun	n7u4ey	rope that holds rock stabilizing weight to the circumference belt of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i variant
\f0\i0  tiigghuteneq									; 
\f2\i see Traditional House Parts in Appendix				
\f0\i0 rope that holds rock stabilizing weight to the circumference belt of a the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)				CK Rub 499		tigghun	txgghun	\uc0\u1090 \u1251 \u1075 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
tiighqe-	n752s-	remove outer garment because of getting hot		uksumi nemeng uyavani puqlayugngaaghmeng tiighqigatut \'91in the winter, when far away from home, they don\'92t remove the outer layer of their clothes, even if they are hot\'92													to remove outer garment because of getting hot		< tiig-?-		CK A & W 128		tighqe-	txghqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1251 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tiigmeraagh-	n7uvsh64-	wear thin, light clothing															to wear thin, light clothing		< tiig-?-				tigmeragh-	txgmerxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1251 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
tiinta	n7ynf	tent		Ellngitneng kiyaghsaghqaaghtestaqiit, taawanginaq 
\f2\i tiintameng
\f0\i0 , egllumeng, avlawa sangwaa, kagimkaq \'85. \'91They had them live on their own, with a 
\f2\i tent
\f0\i0 , stove, flour, sugar, \'85\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:60); Umegneghuluku 
\f2\i tiintaluteng
\f0\i0  nayughiiqut. \'91During a snowstorm we\'92d watch over [the reindeer] using a 
\f2\i tent
\f0\i0 . (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:98)													tent		from English \'91tent\'92	SLI			tinta	txnta	\uc0\u1090 \u1251 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \

\f1\b tiipela\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub n7gskf\super s	\nosupersub table		
\f2\i the dual, 
\f0\i0 tiipelek
\f2\i , is used for one table; 
\f0\i0 = tipela													table		from English \'91table\'92	SLI			tipelae	txpelae	\uc0\u1090 \u1251 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1072 \u1099 \
tiiwhte-	n7[1ns-	turn and present a narrow profile in place of a broad profile		un\'92ga awavani telaanangat tiiwhsalghiimeng aviighutut talughtut \'91when the sailboat far out there turned and then presented a narrow profile, it couldn\'92t be seen any more\'92	narrow profile (turn and present a ~  in place of a broad profile)												to turn and present a narrow profile in place of a broad profile				CK A & W 128		tiwhte-	txwhte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1251 \u1093 \u1265 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tiiwri, tiiwrin	n71hb. n71hby	pole, main, in the traditional dome-shaped house															main pole in the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		from Chukchi tew0r, pl. tewrit \'91one of the three principal poles of a yaranga\'92	14			tiwri, tiwrin	txwri, txwrin	\uc0\u1090 \u1251 \u1265 \u1088 \u1080 , \u1090 \u1251 \u1265 \u1088 \u1080 \u1085 \

\f1\b tikela\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nbrskf\super s	\nosupersub block and tackle		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E); used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 tikelek, 
\f2\i for one such unit													
\f0\i0 block and tackle	nfkb	from English \'91tackle\'92	Chuk.	CK V & E 84		tikelek	tikelek	\uc0\u1090 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1072 \u1099 \
tilma	nbkvf	eagle		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined; also translated as 
\f0\i0 \'91sea-eagle\'92 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  \'91kite\'92									check				eagle		from Chukchi tilmetil, t0lm0t0l \'91eagle\'92	01, 14	deR. 358		tilma	tilma	\uc0\u1090 \u1080 \u1083 \u1084 \u1072 \
tinmaawi-	nbyv61b-	accustomed to something (become ~)		= tenmaawi-													to become accustomed to something		from Chukchi tenmaw0k \'91pack belongings, assemble\'92	14			tinmawi-	tinmxwi-	\uc0\u1090 \u1080 \u1085 \u1084 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\

\f1\b tipela\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nbgskf\super s	\nosupersub table		
\f2\i the dual, 
\f0\i0 tipelek
\f2\i , is used for one table;  
\f0\i0 tipelegni \'91on the table\'92; 
\f2\i  Tipelem
\f0\i0  qaayngani taawa aynganangak qipuqayugek. \'91On top of the 
\f2\i table
\f0\i0  was a wind-up phonograph.\'92 (PANGEGH. 31); = tiipela													table		from English \'91table\'92	SLI			tipelae	tipelae	\uc0\u1090 \u1080 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1072 \u1099 \
tiwlapa	nb1kzgf	dish of reindeer intestines that are boiled with blood and reindeer tallow		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 dish of reindeer intestines that are boiled with blood and reindeer tallow		from Chuckhi ?		CK Rub 500		tiwlapa	tiwlapa	\uc0\u1090 \u1080 \u1265 \u1083 \u1103 \u1087 \u1072 \
tufliq	neakb2	slipper		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 tuflik
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 \'91pair of slippers\'92													slipper		from Russian neakb (tufli) \'91slippers\'92		CK Rub 512		tufliq	tufliq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1092 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
tugaasiq	neu6cb2	crowbar		
\f2\i Chuktokan (R)													
\f0\i0 crowbar		< tugu-(u)siq		CK Rub 502		tugasiq	tugxsiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
tugaasiq, tugaan	neu6cb2. neu6y	ice pick (spud)															ice pick (spud)		< tugagh-(u)siq, tugagh-(n)n				tugasiq, tugan	tugxsiq, tugxn	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 , \u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u257 \u1085 \
tugagh-	neuf4-	use an ice pick		tugaghtuq \'91he used an ice pick\'92; tugaghaa \'91he used an icepick on it\'92 / = tugegh-	chip ice with an ice pick												to use an ice pick;  chip ice with an ice pick		PE tu!03-				tugagh-	tugagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tugaghtugh-	neuf5ne4-	chip repeatedly with an ice pick															to chip repeatedly with an ice pick		< tugagh-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				tugaghtugh-	tugaghtugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
tugaq	neuf2	ice pick (spud)		= tugeq													ice pick (spud)		PE tu!03 (under PE tu!03-)				tugaq	tugaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b tugegh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub neus4-\'a1	chip with an ice pick		= tugagh-; iighwilngwaaq  tugaqwaa sigiqaa \'91the current is breaking the ice pack\'92	push on the ice pack breaking it up (of ocean current)												to chip with an ice pick; to push on the ice pack breaking it up (of ocean current)		PE tu!03-		second gloss from CK A & W 129		tugegh-1	tugegh-1	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1271 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub tugegh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub neus4-\'99	big (be too ~ to fit in)		aangelghiimeng pikenguq tugeghyamikek \'91she got a bigger one when she got too big for them\'92													to be too big to fit in						tugegh-2	tugegh-2	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1271 -\super 2\
\nosupersub tugeghraasiq	neus4h6cb2	ice pick, makeshift															makeshift ice pick		< tugeq-ragh-(u)siq				tugeghrasiq	tugeghrxsiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
tugeghyagte-	neus4mz[ns-	small and tight (be ~ (of clothes))		kaamgegni mekelliighaniitem tugeghyagtaak \'91his boots are starting to be so tight, because they are getting smaller for him\'92													to be small and tight (of clothes)		< tugegh\super 2\nosupersub -?-		CK A & W 128		tugeghyagte-	tugeghyagte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tugeq 	neus2	ice pick (spud)		= tugaq													ice pick (spud)		PE tu!03 (under PE tu!03-)				tugeq 	tugeq 	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1179 \
tugg	ne[	bang		the sound or noise children use in situations where "bang" would be used in English; = tum													bang						tugg	tugg	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1093 \

\fs20 tughneghaam ayaviigha	ne4ys4fv fzd74f	
\fs24 mushroom		
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0  \'91devil\'92s cane\'92													mushroom		< tughneghaq + ayaviiq		CK Rub 502	xxxa	tughnegham ayavigha	tughneghxm ayavxgha	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1084  \u1072 \u1103 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \

\fs20 tughneghaam sigutanga	ne4ys46v cbuenf3f	
\fs24 toadstool		
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0  'devil's ear\'92; 
\f2\i note that the same idiom used in Central Yup'ik Nunivak dialect where \'91toadstool\'92 is tuunram ciutii 													
\f0\i0 toadstool		< tughneghaq-
\f2\i relative
\f0\i0  + sigun-
\f2\i possessed			
\f0\i0 xxxs	tughnegham sigutanga	tughneghxm sigutanga	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u257 \u1084  \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \
tughneghaq*	ne4ys4f2	shaman\'92s familiar spirit		Pimakanga, \'93Alingegpenang.  
\f2\i Tughneghaanghitunga
\f0\i0 .  Yuguunga nunakun piyukayuk.\'94 \'91She said to him, \'93Don\'92t be afraid. I am not a 
\f2\i shamanic spirit
\f0\i0 . I am a human who can walk on earth.\'94\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:24); Ateghpegun aanesquqaqaput 
\f2\i tughneghaat
\f0\i0  uglalghiineng yugneng. \'91In Your name we drove many 
\f2\i devils
\f0\i0  out of people.\'92 (Matthew 7.22)	devil	satan								spirit (shaman\'92s familiar ~)			shaman's familiar spirit; devil; Satan		PE tu!0n3a3				tughneghaq*	tughneghaq*	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tughumgha-	ne4ev4f-	wrestle (with)		tughumghaaq \'91he is wrestling\'92; tughumghaa \'91he is wrestling with him\'92 / tughumghatuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  are wrestling\'92; tughumghasta \'91a wrestler\'92													to wrestle (with)						tughumgha-	tughumgha-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1084 \u1271 \u1072 -\
tughwaagh-	ne4164-	nearer (get ~)		igaghyaghvik tughwaaghtuq \'91school time is getting near\'92; nunavaget tughwaaghluki sikukun ayakitut \'91they got near a herd of walrus but were blocked by the ice\'92	get nearer												to get nearer				CK A & W 129 CK		tughwagh-	tughwxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
tugilleq	neubk]s2	place where someone has used an ice pick															place where someone has used an ice pick		< tugagh-?-lleq				tugilleq	tugilleq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
tugmaghtisiq	neuvf5nbcb2	funeral		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 funeral		< tugmaghte-i\super 1\nosupersub -(u)siq		CK Rub 501		tugmaghtisiq	tugmaghtisiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
tugmagte-	neuvf[ns-	store away for later use		tugmagtuq \'91he stored something away\'92; tugmagtaa \'91he stored it away\'92 /	kill (him) and bury or conceal the body												to store away for later use; to kill (him) and bury or conceal the body		PE tu&va3-				tugmagte-	tugmagte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tugu-	neue-	take with the hand		tugaa \'91he took it\'92 / tugutuq \'91he took something\'92; tugiiguq \'91he took something he shouldn't have taken\'92; tugutuk 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tugututuk \'91they got married\'92	grab	pick up								take as a wife			to take with the hand; to grab; to pick up; to take as a wife						tugu-	tugu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 -\
tugukligh- 	neuerk]b4-	take in (orphan, guest)		tuguklighaa \'91he took him in; he grabbed onto it\'92 /	grab onto something to keep from falling												to take in (orphan, guest); to grab onto something to keep from falling		< tugu-?-				tugukligh- 	tugukligh- 	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
tugulagh-	neuekz4-	take continually or repeatedly		tugulaghaa \'91he kept taking it\'92 /													to take continually or repeatedly		< tugu-?-				tugulagh-	tugulagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 -\
tugulaghvike-	neuekz4dbrs-	take things from (him)		tugulaghvikaa \'91he took things from her\'92													to take things from (him)		< tugulagh-vik-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				tugulaghvike-	tugulaghvike-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\
tugulegh-	neueks4-	molest sexually			grope (sexually)												to molest sexually; to grope (sexually)		< tugu-?-				tugulegh-	tugulegh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
tugulghaagh-	neuek464-	wrestle		tugulghaaghtuq \'91he is wrestling with someone\'92; tugulghaaghaa \'91he is wrestling with him\'92 /	hug												to wrestle; to hug		< tugu-?-				tugulghagh-	tugulghxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 -\
tugulghute-	neuek4ens-	fight			handle (him) roughly												to fight; handle (him) roughly		< tugu-?-(u)te-				tugulghute-	tugulghute-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tugumavik	neuevfdbr	handle			bail (arched handle of bucket, pot, etc.)												handle; bail (arched handle of bucket, pot, etc.)		< tugu-(u)ma-vik				tugumavik	tugumavik	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
tugumiighun	neuev74ey	valued item taken by bride when she moves in with her inlaws			dowry												valued item taken by bride when she moves in with her inlaws; dowry		< tugu-miigh-(u)n				tugumighun	tugumxghun	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
tugumiiq	neuev72	thing held in the hand			hand (thing held in ~)	held thing, in hand											thing held in the hand		< tugu-miiq				tugumiq	tugumxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1251 \u1179 \
tugumiiqe-	neuev72s-	hold in the hand or hands		Aghnam aqeftaghaaghegni 
\f2\i tugumiiqlukek
\f0\i0  estugaghtuq. \'91
\f2\i Taking
\f0\i0  her purse 
\f2\i with
\f0\i0  her, the woman went to the store.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 31)	fastened to an ice cake (of boat)(be ~)	take with one											to hold in the hand or hands; to be fastened to an ice cake (of boat); to take with one		< tugumiiq-ke\super 1\nosupersub -; PE t0!umi(C)a3 (under PE t0!u-)				tugumiqe-	tugumxqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1251 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tugun	neuey	tusk		tugutetuqaq \'91one with big tusks\'92; Enraq ilangita 
\f2\i tugutangi
\f0\i0  ayveghem mengqutun uulqaghtaaghaqegkangit. \'91However others would turn walrus 
\f2\i tusks
\f0\i0  inside out with a popping noise.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 152)	ivory												tusk; ivory		PE t0!!un (under PE t0!u-); < tugu-(u)n				tugun	tugun	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
tuguneq	neueys2	handful		tugungha taghyum \'91a pinch of salt\'92	fistful	pinch of something											handful; fistful; pinch of something		< tugu-neq\super 2				\nosupersub tuguneq	tuguneq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tuguniigh-	neuey74-	handle roughly			grapple with	act on in order to kill (of a shaman)											to handle roughly; to grapple with; to act on in order to kill (of a shaman)		< tugu-niigh-				tugunigh-	tugunxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
tugusnaq	neuecyf2	takes (one who ~ other peoples belongings without their knowledge)		tugusnalghiit aneghneghsigatut, ilateng qivghuliiqiit \'91those who take other peoples things without their knowledge don\'92t end up well; they just make their families feel bad\'92													one who takes other peoples belongings without their knowledge		< tugu-?		CK A & W 130		tugusnaq	tugusnaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
tugutaq	neuenf2	pot holder			handle												pot holder; handle		PE t0!!un (under PE t0!u-); < tugu-(u)taq				tugutaq	tugutaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tugutelleq	neuensk]s2	winnings		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 prize												winnings; prize	dsbuhsi, ghbp	< tugu-(u)te-lleq		CK V & E 99		tugutelleq	tugutelleq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
tugutluk	neuenk]/r	fossilized tusk		Kaviingnaquteperewaaghllak, katam maaten 
\f2\i tugutluggnaqeghllallemtestun
\f0\i0 . \'91Getting foxes was important, just as today our trying to find 
\f2\i old ivory
\f0\i0  (artifacts) is important. (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:174)	tusk, fossilized	old ivory item								artifact of ivory			fossilized tusk; old ivory item; artifact of ivory		< tugun-lluk				tugutluk	tugutluk	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \

\f1\b tuguvik\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub neuedbr\super \'a1	\nosupersub handle			bail (arched handle of bucket, pot, etc.)												handle; bail (arched handle of bucket, pot, etc.)		< tugu-vik				tuguvik1	 tuguvik1	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 1\

\f1\b tuguvik\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub neuedbr\'99	stringer (longitudinal ~ or riser of skin boat to which walrus skin is laced)			riser (longitudinal stringer or ~ on skin boat to which walrus skin is laced)	rail on inside of skin boat below gunwale											longitudinal stringer or riser of skin boat to which walrus skin is laced; rail on inside of skin boat below gunwale		< tugu-vik				tuguvik2	tuguvik2	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 2\
tukaate-	ner6ns-	sicken from eating incompatible foods (such as land greens and sea greens)		tukaatuq \'91he got sick from eating incompatible foods\'92; tukaataa \'91it made him sick\'92 /													to get sick from eating incompatible foods (such as land greens and sea greens)		PY tuka(3)-				tukate-	tukxte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tukagh-	nerf4-	stam one\'92s feet		tukaghtuq \'91he stamped his feet\'92; tukaghaa \'91he stamped his feet on it\'92 / 
\f2\i the meaning
\f0\i0  \'91to dance\'92 
\f2\i is Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 dance												to stamp one's feet; to dance		PE tukka3-		CK Rub 503 (gloss 2)		tukagh-	tukagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tukaghsiiq	nerf5c72	loop, short, of rope holding harpoon head to shaft		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tukaghta									; 
\f2\i see Harpoon Parts in Appendix				
\f0\i0 short loop of rope holding harpoon head to shaft						tukaghsiq	tukaghsxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
tukaghta	nerf5nf	rope, ten-fathom, on a whaling harpoon attaching harpoon to first float		
\f2\i also used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 tukaghtek, 
\f2\i for one such rope; cf.
\f0\i0  tukaghsiiq									; 
\f2\i see Harpoon Parts in Appendix				
\f0\i0 ten-fathom rope on a whaling harpoon attaching harpoon to first float		+ PY tuka3ta (cf. Nunivak Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik tukaXta \'91rope on  harpoon\'92)				tukaghta	tukaghta	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
Tukaghtangighvik	Nerf5nf3b4dbr	site in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site in Chukotka		< tukaghta-(ng)igh-vik		Men. 1972, 1975		tukaghtangighvik	tukaghtangighvik	\uc0\u1058 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
tukegh-	ners4-	brace with one's foot		tukeghtuq \'91he's bracing himself with his foot; it (egg) hatched\'92; tuukghaa \'91he's bracing his foot against it\'92 /	stretch a skin by dampening it and sitting on it holding the edge and pushing out with one's heel	hatch (of egg)											to brace with one's foot; to stretch a skin by dampening it and sitting on it holding the edge and pushing out with one's heel; to hatch (of egg)		PE tuk03-				tukegh-	tukegh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 -\
tukeghiitaq	ners47nf2	foundation column, short,  for lower part of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 foundation column, short,  for lower part of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< tukegh-(ng)iitaq		CK Rub 505		tukeghitaq	tukeghxtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tukeghragh-	ners4hf4-	kick repeatedly with both feet (like a baby does)															to kick repeatedly with both feet (like a baby does)		< tukegh-ragh-				tukeghragh-	tukeghragh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tukeghraq	ners4hf2	treadle sewing machine		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  tukeghrak, 
\f2\i for one sewing machine	
\f0\i0 sewing machine, treadle type												treadle sewing machine						tukeghraq	tukeghraq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
tukeqagh-	ners2f4-	shove with one\'92s foot		tukeqaghtuq \'91he shoved something with his foot\'92; tukeqaghaa \'91he shoved it with his foot\'92 /	kick with one\'92s foot												to shove or kick with one's foot		< tukegh-?-				tukeqagh-	tukeqagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tukfigh-	nerab4-	buy		tukfighaa \'91he bought it\'92 / tukfighiiq \'91he made a purchase\'92													to buy		PE tukvi3-				tukfigh-	tukfigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1271 -\
tukfighaq	nerab4f2	store-bought thing															store-bought thing		< tukfigh-aq				tukfighaq	tukfighaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tukfightugh-	nerab5ne4-	give gifts to the parents of one's son's wife-to-be			pay the bride-price	bride-price (pay the ~)											to give gifts to the parents of one's son's wife-to-be; to pay the bride-price		< tukfigh-tugh\super 2\nosupersub -				tukfightugh-	tukfightugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
tukfightuusiq	nerab5n8cb2	bride-price item or gift															bride-price item or gift		< tukfightugh-(u)siq				tukfightusiq	tukfightxsiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1092 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1263 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
tukiitaa-	ner7n6-	have no place to stay when in another town		akmavek aghvighyuwhaaghuluni tukiitaamaniiquq \'91he says that when he first went to another town he didn\'92t have a place to stay\'92; tukiitaakuvek taakut esgha tukughqat \'91when you don\'92t have a place to stay, here are people to stay with\'92													to have no place to stay when in another town; to not have a host		< tuquq-(ng)ite-?-		CK A &  W130		tukita-	tukxtx-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1251 \u1090 \u257 -\
tukmagh-	nervf4-	trample		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E); cf. 
\f0\i0 tutmagh-													to trample	njgxtncz			CK V & E 165, Rub 504		tukmagh-	tukmagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tukrug-	nerieu-	harden by drying															to harden by drying						tukrug-	tukrug-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1075 -\
tukrugsigh-	nerie[cb4-	dry (allow to ~)															to allow to dry		< tukrug-sigh-				tukrugsigh-	tukrugsigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
tukrugtaq	nerie[nf2	meat that has been dried indoors															piece of meat that has been dried indoors		< tukrug-te\super 1\nosupersub -aq				tukrugtaq	tukrugtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tukruk	nerier	meat hardened by drying			skin hardened by drying												meat or skin hardened by drying						tukruk	tukruk	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1082 \
tukrukaag-	nerier6u-	hard (be somewhat ~)															to be somewhat hard		< tukrug-?-				tukrukag-	tukrukxg-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1082 \u257 \u1075 -\
tukrunpak	nerieygfr	athletic person		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tukrug-	agile person												athletic, agile person						tukrunpak	tukrunpak	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1085 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
tukughaq	nere4f2	ankle			bottom part of pants	back flipper joint											ankle; bottom part of pants; back flipper joint		PY-S tuku(q)		CK Rub 504 (gloss 2)		tukughaq	tukughaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tukughayngwaaq	nere4fq3162	shoe		
\f2\i Chukokan (R,V&E)
\f0\i0  tukughayngwaaghek \'91pair of shoes\'92													shoe	,jnbyrb	< tukughaq-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq		CK V & E 91, Rub. 504		tukughayngwaq	tukughayngwxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
tukughnak	nere4yfr	seashore life type, edible		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 edible sea life type						tukughnak	tukughnak	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \
tukuq	nere2	host		tukaa \'91his host\'92; tukii \'91his hosts\'92													host; the person one stays with as a guest		PE tukku(3)				tukuq	tukuq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \
tukuqe-	nere2s-	arrive as a guest		tukuquq \'91he arrived as a guest (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , has a host)\'92; tukuqaa \'91he is her guest\'92 /	guest (be a guest of (him/her))												to arrive as a guest; to be a guest of (him/her))		< tuku-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				tukuqe-	tukuqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tukuste-	nerecns-	flex all of one\'92s muscles		tukustuq \'91he tensed up, hardened his muscles\'92 /	tense all of one\'92s muscles												to flex or tense all of one's muscles						tukuste-	tukuste-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tulaagh-	nek94-	put splint on something broken		qamiymi ighunaa ayemyan quugsimeng tulaaghluku kaatutkumakanga \'91when one of the legs of his sled broke, he secured it with a stick tied on to it and he got home fine with it\'92	splint (put ~ on something broken)												to put splint on something broken				CK A &  W131		tulagh-	tulxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
tulag-	nekzu-	slash		tulagtuq \'91he slashed something\'92; tulagaa \'91he slashed it\'92 /	cut												to slash; to cut						tulag-	tulag-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 -\
tulimaq	nekbvf2	rib		
\f2\i the meaning 
\f0\i0  \'91rainbow\'92 
\f2\i is Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 rainbow												rib; rainbow		PE tulima3				tulimaq	tulimaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \
tullumegtaq	nek]/vs[nf2	braid, four-stranded, of sinew		avleqaghtam uskaaghi ivalunguut tullumegtekat \'91bolo strings are made of four-stranded sinew braids\'92	sinew braid, four-stranded												braid, four-stranded, of sinew				CK A & W 131		tullumegtaq	tullumegtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tullumek	nek]/vsr	roof support, front, in the traditional dome-shaped house											
\f2\i see Traditional House Parts in Appendix				
\f0\i0 front roof support in the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)				CK V & E 130 (Russ voc)		tullumek	tullumek	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \
tullumkegtaq	nek]/vrs[nf2	symmetrical object			cube	cylinder											symmetrical object; cube; cylinder						tullumkegtaq	tullumkegtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tulquraq	nek]2ehf2	knot			tied bundle	bundle, tied											knot; tied bundle						tulquraq	tulquraq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
tulugh-	nek/4-	hone		tulughaa \'91he sharpened it\'92 / tulughiiq \'91he sharpened something\'92	whet	sharpen											to hone, whet or sharpen						tulugh-	tulugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 -\
tulughagh-	nek/4f4-	nod when sitting and falling asleep		tulughaghtuq \'91he is sleepily nodding his head\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nulugh-, tuluumsiighte-													to nod when sitting and falling asleep		PE nulu3(a3)-				tulughagh-	tulughagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tulughyak	nek/4mzr	canine tooth		Nanuum melqwatun melqulegllak, ayveghem tugutangatun 
\f2\i tulughyagllagkek
\f0\i0 , \'85. \'91It had shaggy fur like a polar bear\'92s fur, 
\f2\i big canine teeth
\f0\i0  like a walrus\'92s tusk.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 30)	tooth, canine												canine tooth		PE tulu3ya3 (under PE tulu3-)				tulughyak	tulughyak	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
tuluumsiighte-	nek0vc75ns-	nap		tuluumsiighlluni teghtughyalghiimi aghtaghaghaqeftaa \'91after he took a nap when he woke up he noticed that it was becoming daylight\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tulughagh-, nulugh-													to take a nap		PE nulu3(a3)-		CK A & W 131		tulumsighte-	tulxmsxghte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u772 \u1084 \u1089 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tum	nev	bang		
\f2\i the sound or noise children use in situations where "bang" would be used in English; 
\f0\i0 = tugg													bang						tum	tum	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \
tumaaghite-	nev65bns-	footprints (get or have a lot of ~)		kaviighmun neqesghani esghaghyaqminiki naqam tumaaghilluteng naaptegpenateng \'91when he saw his fox bait, there were a lot of tracks in the area, but nothing had been caught\'92	tracks (get or have a lot of ~)												to get or have a lot of tracks or footprints				CK A & W 131		tumaghite-	tumxghite-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \u257 \u1203 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b tuma\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nevf\super s	\nosupersub footprint		
\f2\i often plural for one trail or road;
\f0\i0   tuumngitni 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tumangitni \'91on their trail\'92	track	trail								road			footprint; track; trail; way; path; road		PE tum0				tumae	tumae	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1099 \
tumag-	nevfu-	taste bitter		tumagtuq \'91it is bitter \'91/	bitter (taste ~)												to taste bitter		PE tuma!-				tumag-	tumag-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 -\
tumagreghagh-	nevfuhs4f4-	pack for a trip		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf.
\f0\i0  tuma													to pack for a trip				CK Rub 507		tumagreghagh-	tumagreghagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1075 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tumangani	nevf3fyb	on the way		
\f2\i particle; literal or figurative meaning; 
\f0\i0 Taagken igleghsimalghii. 
\f2\i Tumangani
\f0\i0  tagitugisimakanga. 'Then he went. 
\f2\i On the way
\f0\i0  the fog lifted.' (UNGIPAGHAGH. 27); 
\f2\i Tumangani
\f0\i0  unugyatni eslami aghuliighlaataghtuq. '
\f2\i On the way
\f0\i0  when night came upon him he stopped outdoors.' (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 16)													on the way		< tuma-
\f2\i 3rd person possessor localis				
\f0\i0 tumangani	tumangani	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
tumelqusiq	nevsk]2ecb2	time spent on journey															the entire time spent on a journey		< tuma\super e\nosupersub -lqusiq				tumelqusiq	tumelqusiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
tumighqaate-	nevb526ns-	return to St. Lawrence Is. from Chukotka or vice-versa		Taagken apeghiinghata tawaten atughllaneghmeng, 
\f2\i tumighqaannaqneghmeggni
\f0\i0 , taglaghtuunnaqneghmeggni, 
\f2\i tumighqaannaqniiqut
\f0\i0 .\'92 After singing (and dancing) when they [the Chokotkans] were ready to 
\f2\i go home
\f0\i0 , they\'92d announce that they were ready to 
\f2\i go home
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:140)													to return to St. Lawrence Is. from Chukotka or vice-versa		< tumigte-?-				tumighqate-	tumighqxte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tumigte-	nevb[ns-	return to St. Lawrence Island from Chukotka or vice-versa		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tuma													to return to St. Lawrence Island from Chukotka or vice-versa						tumigte-	tumigte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tunagmik	neyfuvbr	bribe		
\f2\i slang													
\f0\i0 bribe		< tunak-mik				tunagmik	tunagmik	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1075 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \

\f1\b tunak\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub neyfr\super \'a1	\nosupersub palm of hand															palm of hand		PE 0t0ma!-				tunak1	tunak1	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 1\

\f1\b tunak\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub neyfr\super \'99	\nosupersub smooth trail			trail, smooth												smooth trail		PE 0t0ma!-				tunak2	tunak2	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 2\
tunallagute-	neyfk]zuens-	fall on one\'92s buttocks		tunallagutuq \'91he fell on his buttocks\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tunu													to fall on one's buttocks; 						tunallagute-	tunallagute-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tune-	neys-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > tunqugh-, tunusaq, tuune-															PE tun0-				tune-	tune-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 -\
tunemaq	neysvf2	foundation		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tuneq													foundation						tunemaq	tunemaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1084 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuneq	neys2	mat		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  tuunghet, 
\f2\i or in the dual for one mat	
\f0\i0 floor covering												mat; floor covering		PE tu&03				tuneq	tuneq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \

\f1\b tunga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ne3f\super s	\nosupersub vicinity, immediate		tunganga \'91its vicinity, his relative\'92; tunganganun \'91toward it\'92	relative, close but outside immediate familly	toward (area ~)											immediate vicinity; close relative but outside immediate family; area toward		PE tu&0-				tungae	tungae	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
tungangigh-	ne3f3b4-	come near		tungangighaa \'91he came near it\'92 / 	near (come ~)												to come near to		< tunga-(ng)igh-				tungangigh-	tungangigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
tungangiite-	ne3f37ns-	line (be in ~ with something)		tengegkayuget naaygham qagughruganun tungangiitut \'91the airplane is in line with the corner of the mountain\'92													to be in line with something; to line up with something		< tungangigh-(u)te-				tungangite-	tungangxte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1187 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tungeqliq*	ne3s2k]b2	next one															next one		PE tu&(0)li3 (under PE tu&0-); < tunga\super e\nosupersub -qliq				tungeqliq*	tungeqliq*	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1099 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
tungik	ne3br	harpoon part (ivory piece between head and shaft of whaling harpoon where it fits into the socket)											
\f2\i see Harpoon Parts in Appendix				
\f0\i0 ivory piece between head and shaft of whaling harpoon where it fits into the 
\f2\i giimaq
\f0\i0  (socket)		PY-S tu&i(q)				tungik	tungik	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1082 \

\f1\b tungla\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ne3kf\super s	\nosupersub hair, short at hairline		
\f2\i Chukotkan; used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 tunglet	frost barrier of cut grass tied at the outer side of reindeer hide door												frost barrier of cut grass tied at the outer side of reindeer hide door; short hair at hairline		PE tu&l0(3)				tunglae	tunglae	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1083 \u1072 \u1099 \
tunglu	ne3k/	ice (broken-up ~ that has moved in next to shore thus obstructing all travel)			sea ice type												broken-up ice that has moved in next to shore thus obstructing all travel						tunglu	tunglu	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \
tungqaghaghte-	ne32f4f5ns-	hit close to the mark (literally or figuratively)															to hit close to the mark (literally or figuratively)		< tunga\super e\nosupersub -?-				tungqaghaghte-	tungqaghaghte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tungsigh-	ne3cb4-	ask for		tungsightuq \'91he asked for something\'92; tungsighaa \'91he asked for it\'92 /													to ask for		PE tu&ci3-				tungsigh-	tungsigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
tungtu	ne3ne	caribou		
\f2\i caribou are found in Chukotka but rarely encountered on St. Lawrence Is.	Rangifer tarandus												
\f0\i0 caribou (Rangifer tarandus)		PE tuntu				tungtu	tungtu	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1090 \u1091 \
Tungtum Qalghighviga	
\fs20 Ne3nev @fk4b4dbuf	
\fs24 October		
\f2\i Chukotkan; literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time when the caribou issues its cry\'92; 
\f2\i also listed in various sources as
\f0\i0  September-October, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  November													October				see Krauss\'92s list	xxxq	Tungtum Qalghighviga	Tungtum Qalghighviga	\uc0\u1058 \u1091 \u1187 \u1090 \u1091 \u1084  \u1178 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \
tungtuqu-	ne3ne2e-	hunt caribou			caribou (hunt ~)												to hunt caribou		< tungtu-qu\super 1\nosupersub -				tungtuqu-	tungtuqu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 -\
Tungtut	ne3nen	Big Dipper (and associated stars) constellation		
\f2\i literally:
\f0\i0  \'91caribous\'92; Tawatennguq 
\f2\i Tungtutgun
\f0\i0  ayghughtut. Aghhneghani siqinghem tunganganun igleghtaqluteng. \'91They traveled north, using the 
\f2\i Big Dipper 
\f0\i0 as their guide. During daylight hours they traveled toward the sun.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:122) 	Ursa Major (constellation)	constellation of Ursa Major											Big Dipper (and associated stars) constellation; Ursa Major		PE tuntu3yuk (under PE tuntu); < tungtu-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Tungtut	Tungtut	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \
tungtuvak	ne3nedfr	moose		
\f2\i moose are found in Chukotka but not on St. Lawrence Is.	Alces alces												
\f0\i0 moose (Alces alces)		< tungtu-vak; PY-S tuntuvak (under PE tuntu)				tungtuvak	tungtuvak	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1090 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
tungu-	ne3e-	stare vacantly into space		tunguuq \'91he is or was daydreaming\'92 /	daydream												to stare vacantly into space; to daydream						tungu-	tungu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 -\
tungunghaqe-	ne3ey4f2s-	sleep deeply and soundly		tungunghaqunneghsighluki ilani aanuq \'91he waited for his others to get into a deep sleep and then he left\'92													to sleep deeply and soundly		< tungu-?-		CK A & W 132		tungunghaqe-	tungunghaqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tunguuya	ne38z	salmon, dog or chum			dog salmon	chum salmon								
\f2\i Oncorhynchus keta			
\f0\i0 dog or chum salmon (Oncorhynchus keta)				from Chukchi ?		tunguya	tungxya	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1263 \u1103 \
tungyuq	ne3m/2	high tide			tide, high												high tide		PY-S tu&yuq				tungyuq	tungyuq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \
tungzigh-	ne3pb4-	flare out			fan out												to flare out; to fan out						tungzigh-	tungzigh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 -\
tungzighaq	ne3pb4f2	rough border area of ice field onto which it is hard to pull game		
\f2\i see item 82 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	barrier that obstructs	sea ice type											rough border area of ice field onto which it is hard to pull game; barrier that obstructs		< tungzigh-aq				tungzighaq	tungzighaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1187 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tunqugh-	ney2e4-	donate generously															to donate generously		< tune-qugh-				tunqugh-	tunqugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
tunqughta 	ney2f5nf	contributor			philanthropist	sponsor (monetary)								funder or funding agency			contributor; philanthropist; sponsor (monetary); funder or funding agency		< tunqugh-(s)ta				tunqughta 	tunqughta 	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
tunu	neye	back		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tunallagute-	behind (area ~)												back; area behind		PE tunu				tunu	tunu	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \
tunughaq, tunughaaq	neye4f2. neye462	quartz or other white rock															quartz or other white rock		< tunuq-ghaq, tunuq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				tunughaq, tunughaq	tunughaq, tunughxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 , \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \
Tunuliik	Neyek7r	Gambell (pond in central area of present-day ~)		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 pond in central area of present-day Gambell						Tunulik	Tunulxk	\uc0\u1058 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1082 \
tunupightagh-	neyegb5nf4-	keep one\'92s back turned to others		kaynguyugemllu entaqun tunupightaghtuq \'91perhaps it is because of bashfulness that she\'92s keeping her back turned to the others\'92													to keep one\'92s back turned to others		< tunu-?-		CK A & W 132		tunupightagh-	tunupightagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1087 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tunuq	neye2	fat of reindeer or caribou		Ilungan 
\f2\i tunaaneng
\f0\i0  uulsimiita imiqayuget. Qellungi tamaakut ama uulsimiita, 
\f2\i tunughtuqat
\f0\i0 . \'91These can be turned inside out and filled with its (the reindeer\'92s) 
\f2\i fat
\f0\i0 . The large intestine is also turned inside out, and has a lot of 
\f2\i fat
\f0\i0  (on it).\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:96)	tallow												reindeer or caribou back fat		PE tunnu3				tunuq	tunuq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \
tunuqaq	neye2f2	back side of house															back side of house		< tunu-qaq				tunuqaq	tunuqaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
tunuqaraak	neye2fh6r	room, small, at back of house, entered from outside, used for storage or work															small room at the back of the house entered from outside and used for working or storage		< tunuqaq-raak				tunuqarak	tunuqarxk	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
tunuqin	neye2by	rear of house (makeshift structure at ~)			back of pants seat (strip of red-dyed polar bear skin sewn onto ~)												makeshift structure at rear of house; strip of red-dyed polar bear skin sewn onto back of skin pants		< tunuqaq-li-(u)n				tunuqin	tunuqin	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \
tunuqliq*	neye2k]b2	rear (thing at ~)															thing at the rear		< tunu-qliq				tunuqliq*	tunuqliq*	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
tunuquvinghaq	neye2edby4f2	tallow		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check to see if used on SLI, /this might mean old tallow-CK 				tallow	cfkmysq	< tunuq-kuvinghaq		Rub. 508		tunuquvinghaq	tunuquvinghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tunurriitaq	neyei7nf2	meaty part of upper whale gum		= tunusitaq	\'93oyster\'94 (so-called) of baleen												meaty part of upper whale gum; \'93oyster\'94 (so-called) of baleen		< tunuq-?-				tunurritaq	tunurrxtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1096 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tunusaq, tunusiitaq	neyecz2. neyec7nf2	gift															gift		< tune-(u)saq, tune-(u)saq-?				tunusaq, tunusitaq	tunusaq, tunusxtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 , \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tunusitaq	neyecbnf2	meaty part of upper whale gum		= tunurriitaq	\'93oyster\'94 (so-called) of baleen								Chris gives this with one i however; check				meaty part of upper whale gum; \'93oyster\'94 (so-called) of baleen		< tunuq-?-				tunusitaq	tunusitaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tunusugkugh-	neyec/[re4-	hit on the back of head		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to hit on the back of head		< tunusuk-?-		CK Rub 509		tunusugkugh-	tunusugkugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 -\
tunusuk	neyec/r	back of neck and head															back of neck and head		PE tunucu! (under PE tunu); < tunu-?				tunusuk	tunusuk	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
tunute-	neyens-	turn away		tunutuq \'91he turned away\'92; tunutaa \'91he turned away from her\'92 /	turn one\'92s back on (him)												to turn away; to turn one's back on (him)		PE tunut- (under PE tunu); < tunu-te\super ?\nosupersub -				tunute-	tunute-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tunuvagh-	neyedf4-	back (go or take ~)		saghyat tunuvaghiit qagineng \'91they took the things out of the reach of the waves\'92 	go back	take back											to go back; to take back		PE tunuva3- (under PE tunu); < tunu-vagh-				tunuvagh-	tunuvagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tupag-, tupagpag-	negfu-. negf[gfu-	startled (get ~)		tupagtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tupagpagtuq \'91he got startled\'92 / tupagtaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tupagpagtaa \'91he startled her\'92													to get startled		PE tupa!-				tupag-, tupagpag-	tupag-, tupagpag-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -, \u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
tupagpagtagh-	negf[gf[nf4-	convulsions (have ~)			jerk one's body in sleep												to have convulsions; to jerk one's body in sleep		< tupag(pag)-tagh\super 2\nosupersub -				tupagpagtagh-	tupagpagtagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tupeq	negs2	shelter, makeshift															makeshift shelter		PE tup03				tupeq	tupeq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \
tupeqaag-, tupeqwaag-	negs26u-. negs216u-	clumsy (be ~)			awkward (be ~)	stiff (be ~)											to be clumsy or awkward or stiff						tupeqag-, tupeqwag-	tupeqxg-, tupeqwxg-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u257 \u1075 -, \u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1075 -\
tupeqaak, tupeqwaak	negs26r. negs216r	bulky thing		tupeqwaak usi \'91bulky load\'92	awkward thing												bulky or awkward thing				CK Rub 510		tupeqak, tupeqwak	tupeqxk, tupeqwxk	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u257 \u1082 , \u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1082 \
tupnguugh-	neg3]84-	move from natural environment due to being bothered or from excessive traffic nearby (of wild animal)		tungemta ukum qawaaga tupghuughtuq igleghtem leveklugem \'91our area\'92s birds have gone because of traffic and noise from vehicles\'92													to move from natural environment due to being bothered or from excessive traffic nearby (of wild animal)				CK A & W 133		tupngugh-	tupngxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1187 \u1100 \u1263 \u1271 -\
tuqaa-	ne26-	\'93high\'94 (feel ~)		tawaqatupagluni tuqaamalghii \'91he took lots of tobacco and feels "high"\'92; tanqiq tuqaanaquq \'91there\'92s going to be a lunar eclipse\'92	eclipse (of moon or sun)												to feel "high"; to eclipse (of moon or sun)		< tuqu-?-				tuqa-	tuqx-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u257 -\
tuqaallngwaaghagh-	ne26k]31]64f4-	stand motionless		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 lose consciousness												to stand motionless; to lose consciousness		< tuqu-?-		CK Rub 505		tuqallngwaghagh-	tuqxllngwxghagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u257 \u1083 \u1100 \u1187 \u1265 \u1100 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tuqlugh-	ne2k]/4-	call out to		tuqlughaa \'91he called to him, telephoned him\'92 / tuqlughiiq \'91he called out\'92	telephone												to call out to; to telephone		PE tuqlu3(a3)- (under PE tuqlu(!) and tuqlu3)				tuqlugh-	tuqlugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
tuqlughaasiq	ne2k]/46cb2	flag			signal flag used in whaling												flag; signal flag used in whaling		< tuqlughagh-(u)siq				tuqlughasiq	tuqlughxsiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
tuqlughagh-	ne2k]/4f4-	call loudly															to call loudly		< tuqlugh-?-				tuqlughagh-	tuqlughagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tuqlughragh-	ne2k]/4hf4-	call repeatedly															to call repeatedly		< tuqlugh-ragh-				tuqlughragh-	tuqlughragh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tuqluusiq	ne2k]0cb2	telephone		
\f2\i used in dual,
\f0\i0  tuqluusik,
\f2\i  for one telephone													
\f0\i0 telephone		< tuqlugh-(u)siq				tuqlusiq	tuqlxsiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
tuqu-	ne2e-	die		tuquuq \'91he died\'92 / tuqumaaq \'91he has died\'92; tuqungaaq \'91he is dead\'92; 
\f2\i there seems to be a variant,
\f0\i0  tuqwa- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  tuqwaaq \'91he died\'92, tuqwaluku \'91after he died\'92, 
\f2\i etc.
\f0\i0 ; \'85 nunivak saghnaaqegkangat 
\f2\i tuqusighaqluki
\f0\i0 . Awen ungipaqaqanka laluramkenun nunivaget 
\f2\i tuqusighaqniluki
\f0\i0  akmaagutakun. 
\f2\i Tuquneghmeggni
\f0\i0  mesii qugaaghqwaakayuguniluki, ilangi katam juice-estun ayuqniiqanka. \'91\'85 roseroots had to be picked at that time and set aside to 
\f2\i ferment
\f0\i0 . I told some white men about the kegs we used to 
\f2\i ferment
\f0\i0  our roseroots in. When they 
\f2\i fermented
\f0\i0  they got tangy.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:90)	ferment												to die; to ferment						tuqu-	tuqu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 -\
tuqufkagh-	ne2earf4-	knock out		tuqufkaghtuq \'91he knocked himself out\'92; tuqufkaghaa \'91he knocked him out\'92 /													to knock out		< tuqu-fkagh-				tuqufkagh-	tuqufkagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tuqukaq	ne2erf2	corpse															corpse		< tuqu-(g)kaq				tuqukaq	tuqukaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuquma-	ne2evf-	dead (be ~)		tuqumaaq \'91it is dead\'92 / 													to be dead		< tuqu-(i/u)ma-				tuquma-	tuquma-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 -\
tuqumastiq	ne2evfcnb2	corpse			dead person												corpse; dead person	vthndtw. gjrjqybr	< tuquma-?		CK V & E 67; CK		tuqumastiq	tuqumastiq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1090 \u1080 \u1179 \
tuqumsiyug-	ne2evcb/u-	death (have a close brush with ~)			die (almost ~)												to have a close brush with death; to almost die		< tuqu-?				tuqumsiyug-	tuqumsiyug-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1102 \u1075 -\
tuqumyighaqaq	ne2evqb4f2f2	half-dead one		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 unconsious one								check whether used on SLI				one who is half-dead; unconscious one		< tuqu-?		Rub. 506		tuqumyighaqaq	tuqumyighaqaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1253 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuqunagh-	ne2eyf4-	poisonous (be ~)															to be poisonous		< tuqu-nagh-				tuqunagh-	tuqunagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tuqunaq	ne2eyf2	poison															poison		< tuqu-naq				tuqunaq	tuqunaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuqunghaaghaq	ne2ey464f2	frail dog, other animal, or person															frail dog, other animal, or person		< tuqu-?-				tuqunghaghaq	tuqunghxghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuquraag-	ne2eh6u-	knock out		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to knock out		< tuqu-?-		CK Rub 506		tuqurag-	tuqurxg-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1088 \u257 \u1075 -\
tuqutaq	ne2enf2	carcass, freshly killed															freshly killed carcass		< tuqute-aq		CK Rub 506		tuqutaq	tuqutaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuqute-	ne2ens-	kill		tuqutaa \'91he killed it\'92 / tuqusimaaq \'91it has been killed\'92; tuqutiiq \'91he killed something\'92; tuqutkaq \'91killed thing\'92													to kill		PE tuqut- (under PE tuqu-)				tuqute-	tuqute-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Tuqutighvik	Ne2enb4dbr	August		
\f2\i Chukotkan; literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time for slaughter (of reindeer); 
\f2\i also given in various sources as
\f0\i0  July-August, September, (
\f2\i and even
\f0\i0  November!)													August		< tuqute-vik		see Krauss\'92s list		Tuqutighvik	Tuqutighvik	\uc0\u1058 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
Tuqutiighvik	Ne2en74dbr	September		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91time for killing (reindeer?)\'92	October												September; October		< tuqute-i\super 1\nosupersub -?-vik				Tuqutighvik	Tuqutxghvik	\uc0\u1058 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1251 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
tuqutngwaagh-	ne2en3]164	laugh heartily		nenglaghnaghqullghiit yiillgitneng tuqutngwaaghutkumakangi \'91he laughed hard about them acting comically\'92													to laugh heartily		< tuqute-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 2\nosupersub -		CK A & W 132 CK		tuqutngwagh-	tuqutngwxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \
tuquuqagh-	ne282f4-	drive nail into (it)		tuquuqaghaa \'91he drove a nail into it\'92 / tuquuqaataa \'91he nailed it to something\'92													to drive nail into (it)						tuquqagh-	tuqxqagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1263 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tuquuqaq	ne282f2	nail (wood fastener)		Pillugaghtet 
\f2\i tuquuqaasamegteggu
\f0\i0  Jesus qaquuramun \'85. \'91When the soldiers 
\f2\i nailed
\f0\i0  Jesus to the cross \'85.\'92 (John 19.23)									where is this word from?				nail (wood fastener)						tuquqaq	tuqxqaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1263 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuquyug-	ne2e/u-	deathly ill (be ~)			ill (be deathly ~)												to be deathly ill		< tuqu-yug-				tuquyug-	tuquyug-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1102 \u1075 -\
tuquyuk	ne2e/r	deathly ill person or animal															deathly ill person or animal		< tuqu-yug-				tuquyuk	tuquyuk	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1102 \u1082 \
turi	nehb	dory															dory		from English \'91dory\'92	SLI			turi	turi	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1088 \u1080 \
turiik	neh7r	American golden plover			golden plover, American	plover, American golden								
\f2\i Pluvius dominica			
\f0\i0 American golden plover
\f2\i  (Pluvius dominica)		
\f0\i0 PE tu9i!				turik	turxk	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1088 \u1251 \u1082 \
turituriq	nehbnehb2	flint for making fire		
\f2\i Chukotkan; questioned													
\f0\i0 flint for making fire						turituriq	turituriq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1088 \u1080 \u1090 \u1091 \u1088 \u1080 \u1179 \
tusaqe-	necz2s-	hear and comprehend		tusaquq \'91he heard\'92; tusaqaa \'91he heard her\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 tuuslagh-	comprehend (hear and ~)												to hear and comprehend		PE tuca3-				tusaqe-	tusaqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tusaqesighwaagh-	necz2scb4164-	ignore it when told to do something acting as though one didn\'92t heard		enraq kevgaqnaqegkaput tusaqesingwaaghllaget \'91the ones who were going to do something for us are acting as though they didn\'92t hear\'92													to ignore it when told to do something acting as though one didn\'92t heard		< tusaqe-?-		CK A & W 133		tusaqesighwagh-	tusaqesighwxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
tusaqneghllug-	necz2y]s5k]/u-	misunderstand			hear incorrectly												to misunderstand; to hear incorrectly		< tusaqe-neghllug-				tusaqneghllug-	tusaqneghllug-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
tusigagh-	necbuf4-	attend a gathering		
\f2\i perhaps originally a shaman's session													
\f0\i0 to attend a gathering						tusigagh-	tusigagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tusigalliqe-	necbufk]b2s-	mischievous (be ~)															to be mischievous		< tusigate-liqe-				tusigalliqe-	tusigalliqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tusigate-	necbufns-	comical (be ~)		tusigatuq \'91he is witty\'92 /	witty (be ~)	entertaining (be ~)											to be comical, witty, or entertaining		PE tutya!at- \'91limp\'92 (?)				tusigate-	tusigate-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tusigatun	necbufney	comically		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 comically		< tusigate-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 tusigatun	tusigatun	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
tusineq	necbys2	hairless area on either side of head at top of forehead		tusinghek nuyiighutekestaghaqeftaak \'91he is beggining to lose hair on both sides of his upper forehead\'92													hairless area on either side of head at top of forehead				CK A & W 134		tusineq	tusineq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
tusite-	necbns-	inform (him)		ilasi tusitaghlluki pilghaasi \'91tell the other people\'92; tusitiyaghtuumalghii kiwa mallu tepniluku \'91he went to tell people that there is a beached walrus east of here\'92													to inform (him)				CK A & W 134		tusite-	tusite-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tusugniite-	nec/uy7ns-	no news (have ~)		tengegkayuget taginaqnikangit salin tusugniitaqut \'91they say the airplane was supposed to get in, but there\'92s no news lately about them\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 tusaqe-, tusite-													to have no news				CK A & W 134		tusugnite-	tusugnxte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tutaqi	nenf2b	matress pad		neghighluku taghnughhaat tutaqilighluki allighiit qavaghtestaqiit allighat aghisnayuukatki \'91long ago they would place something on children\'92s matresses to keep them from getting them wet\'92													matress pad		< tute-?		CK A & W 134		tutaqi	tutaqi	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1080 \
tute-	nens-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > tutaqi, tuute-\super 1\nosupersub , tutemqaq, tutmagh-,tutmavik															PE tut- or PE tut0-				tute-	tute-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tuteg-	nensu-	side-by-side (get ~ with)		tuutgaa \'91he got side-by-side with him\'92 / tutegluku \'91getting side-by side with it, or parallel to it\'92; tuutgutuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  got side-by-side with each other\'92	parallel (get ~ to)												to get side-by-side with; to get parallel to		PE tut0!(-)				tuteg-	tuteg-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 -\
tutegtaq	nens[nf2	side-by-side (item packed or placed ~ with similar items)		estugaghmeng tutegtameng avlawanguq \'91he got a package of flour at the store from the packages that are situated side by side\'92													item packed side-by-side with similar items		< tuteg-te\super 1\nosupersub -aq		CK A & W 135		tutegtaq	tutegtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tutegvik	nensudbr	dock			berth at pier												dock; berth at pier		< tuteg-vik		CK Rub 511		tutegvik	tutegvik	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1075 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
tutemqaq	nensv2f2	porch		tutemqat \'91porch steps\'92	step-stool												porch; step-stool		PE tutmeqa3 (under PE tut0-); < tute-?-qaq				tutemqaq	tutemqaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1084 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
tutmagh-	nenvf4-	step several times			walk all over something	tread upon											to step several times; to walk all over something; to tread upon		< tute-?-; PE tutma3- (under PE tut0-)				tutmagh-	tutmagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tutmaghwaagh-	nenv]f4164-	search for roots stored by mice in underground caches by stepping around feeling for hollow spots beneath the ground's surface															to search for roots stored by mice in underground caches by stepping around feeling for hollow spots beneath the ground's surface		< tutmagh-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -				tutmaghwagh-	tutmaghwxgh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
tutmavik	nenv]fdbr	mat			rug	floor covering											mat; rug; floor covering		< tute-?-vik				tutmavik	tutmavik	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
tutu	nene	vagina															vagina						tutu	tutu	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \
tutugh-	nene4-	folded over with a crease.		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  tutughtaa \'91he folded it over\'92; tutughngaaq \'91it is folded over\'92													folded over with a crease.						tutugh-	tutugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
tuufqagh-	n8a2f4-	smoke while inhaling the smoke and breathing heavily															to smoke while inhaling the smoke and breathing heavily		< tuufte-?-		CK A & W 133		tufqagh-	txfqagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1092 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tuufqaghtagh-	n8a2f5nf4-	eat quickly		taayugniighem tuufqaghtaghluni angyaghtuq \'91he was in a hurry so he ate quickly and then went boating\'92; tuufqaghtaqiinaghluni qayughluni aanuq \'91he only ate quickly and had tea and then went out\'92													to eat quickly		< tuufte-?-		CK A & W 133		tufqaghtagh-	txfqaghtagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1092 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tuufsaq	n8acz2	gull hook		
\f2\i the gull swallows fat which is used as bait on a hook on a line													
\f0\i0 gull hook		< tuufte-?-				tufsaq	txfsaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1092 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
tuufte-	n8ans-	swallow something accidently		tuuftuq \'91he choked on something\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he has hiccups\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he swallowed something\'92; tuuftaa (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tuufutkaa) \'91he choked on it\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he swallowed it   accidently\'92 /	choke on something	hiccups (have ~)											to swallow something accidently; to choke on something; to have hiccups		PE tup0t-				tufte-	txfte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tuugkaq	n8[rf2	ivory			harpoon head, toggling												ivory; toggling harpoon head		PE tu!0ka3				tugkaq	txgkaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuugtaq	n8[nf2	walrus hide and meat ball (for storage)															walrus hide and meat ball (for storage)		< tuugte-aq				tugtaq	txgtaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuugte-	n8[ns-	bundle securely		tuugtuq \'91he is bundling something securely, he is tightening his hood\'92; tuugtaa \'91he is bundling it\'92 / Siqlugalguluta neqa manguna tamaana 
\f2\i tuugqughluku
\f0\i0 . \'91We had meat cellars for food and walrus skin with flesh on it that we\'92d 
\f2\i draw into a ball for storage
\f0\i0 .\'92 (MRS. DELLA W. 10)	make walrus hide into a ball by putting holes around the edge and drawing a string tightly through it	tighten a parka hood around the face											to bundle securely; to make walrus hide into a ball by putting holes around the edge and drawing a string tightly through it; to tighten a parka hood around the face						tugte-	txgte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tuumke-	n8vrs-	stop (make a ~ for)		tuumkaa \'91he made a stop for her\'92 / 													to make a stop for		< tume-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				tumke-	txmke-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 -\
tuumngiighhaq*	n8v375f2	trail, little		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  tuumngiighhaat, 
\f2\i for one trail													
\f0\i0 little trail		< tume-ngiighhaq				tumngighhaq*	txmngxghhaq*	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1084 \u1187 \u1251 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuumte-	n8vns-	follow		tuumtaa \'91he tracked it\'92 / tuumtiiq \'91he tracked something\'92 	track (follow the ~ of an animal)	follow a path in life											to follow; to track; to follow a path in life		< tume-te\super ?\nosupersub -				tumte-	txmte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1084 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tuune-	n8ys-	give		tuunaa \'91he gave it\'92 / Aghnaghaq iteghyan aghnam tunuq 
\f2\i tuunaa
\f0\i0  \'91when the girl came in the woman 
\f2\i gave
\f0\i0  (her) the tallow\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:198); tuuniiq \'91he gave something\'92; aghnam ugiminun salngak tuunaa \'91the man gave the box to the woman\'92													to give		< tune-				tune-	txne-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1085 \u1099 -\
tuungliq	n83kb2	next one			following  one												next one; following one	cktle/obq	< tunga\super e\nosupersub -liq				tungliq	txngliq	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1187 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
tuungqaq	n832f2	relative (kin)			kin												relative; kin		< tunga\super e\nosupersub -qaq				tungqaq	txngqaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuungsagte-	n83cz[ns-	come near		Neghestim Aghnegha tuungsagtuq \'91it\'92s almost Thanksgiving Day\'92; aghvilleghqani tuungsagniiqaa \'91she says that her departure is coming near\'92	approach												to come near; to approach		< tunga\super e\nosupersub -?-		CK A & W 133		tungsagte-	txngsagte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1187 \u1089 \u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tuunun	n8yey	gift															gift		< tuune-(u)n				tunun	txnun	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1085 \u1091 \u1085 \
tuusaghaq	n8cz4f2	obstacle		
\f2\i Chukotka (R)									
\f0\i0 check to see if used on SLI				obstacle	ghtlvtn. ghtuhf;lf/obq xnj-k>\\ gthty> jndtncndtyysq pf xnj-k>	< tuusaq-ghaq		Rub. 511		tusaghaq	txsaghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuusaq	n8cz2	step			stool	whale vetebra used as a step							
\f2\i see Traditional House Parts in Appendix	
\f0\i0 block at bottom of pole supporting roof of the traditional dome-shaped house			step; stool; whale vertebra used as a step; block at bottom of pole supporting roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< tuute\super 1\nosupersub -?				tusaq	txsaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
tuuslagh-	n8ck]z4-	hard of hearing (be ~)		tuuslaghtuq \'91he has trouble hearing\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tusaqe-	deaf (be ~)												to be hard of hearing; to be deaf		PE tucila3-				tuslagh-	txslagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
tuusliite-	n8ck]7ns-	hear well															to hear well		< tuuslagh-(ng)ite-				tuslite-	txslxte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tuutaqu-	n8nf2e-	step lightly and repeatedly			rain (gentle ~ falls)												to step lightly and repeatedly; for a gentle rain to fall		< tuute-?-				tutaqu-	txtaqu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
tuute-	n8ns-	step on		tuutuq \'91it landed\'92; tuutaa \'91he stepped on it\'92 / tuutaa itegamineng tutmaviggaq nuqneghumaan ighneghmi aallgumaluku iqanga \'91he put his foot on the mat to hold it as his son brushed the dirt off of it\'92; elngaatall tuutuq tesqakma \'91the rain is really coming down hard outside\'92; Kingulighpigaak estugaghmelnguuk aghvigisik 
\f2\i tuutagka
\f0\i0 . \'91I 
\f2\i claimed
\f0\i0  the last washing machine at the store.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 164)	fall (rain)	clean a skin by laying it on the snow and stepping on it								land on the ground			to step on; to put a foot on; to land on the ground; to fall (rain); to clean a skin by laying it on the snow and stepping on it; to claim		< tute-				tute-	txte-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
tuutneq 	n8ny]s2	longitudinal brace of the kayak\'92s frame			tatoo, triangle-shaped, on cheek near corner of mouth	stringer (longitudinal ~ nearest keel in bent-rib boat, or chine ~ in flat-bottom boat)								hole for labret			longitudinal stringer nearest keel in bent-rib boat; chine stringer in flat-bottom boat; longitudinal brace of the kayak\'92s frame; triangle-shaped tatoo on the cheek near corner of mouth; hole for labret 		< tuute-neq\super 2				\nosupersub tutneq 	txtneq 	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1090 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
tuuymig-	n8qvbu-	carry on one\'92s shoulder(s)			nudge with shoulder												to carry on one\'92s shoulder(s); to nudge with shoulder		< tuya\super e\nosupersub -mig-		CK V & E 190, Rub 502 (2nd gloss)		tuymig-	txymig-	\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1253 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
tuvaghnaaq	nedf4y62	shorefast ice, small stretch		
\f2\i see item 83 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												small stretch of shorefast ice		< tuvak-?-				tuvaghnaq	tuvaghnxq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
tuvalluk	nedfk]/r	shore ice, slushy															slushy shore ice		< tuvak-lluk				tuvalluk	tuvalluk	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
tuvaq	nedf2	shorefast ice, large stretch staying a long time, sometimes surrounding a small island		
\f2\i see item 84 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004													large stretch of shorefast ice, staying for a long time, sometimes surrounding a small island		PE tuva3				tuvaq	tuvaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuvghaq	ned4f2	hunter out on the ice (in contrast to one hunting by boat)		Taana Pangawyi amalka 
\f2\i tuvghaqluku
\f0\i0 , ataasiighpagtekaayalghiit. Pinaayankut, Veghtekaankut. \'91Pangawyi was their 
\f2\i partner
\f0\i0 ; they were as one, with Pinaaya and Veghtekaq.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:12)	dependable person	partner (reliable ~)											hunter out on the ice (in contrast to one hunting by boat); dependable person; reliable partner		PE tuv03a3				tuvghaq	tuvghaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1074 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
tuviilleq	ned7k]s2	shore ice that has broken loose from the shore		
\f2\i see item 85 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												shore ice that has broken loose from the shore		< tuvak-?-lleq\super 1				\nosupersub tuvilleq	tuvxlleq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1074 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \

\f1\b tuwaaya\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ne16z\super s	\nosupersub twine		
\f2\i also used in Chokotka													
\f0\i0 twine		from English \'91twine\'92	SLI Chuk.	R512		tuwayae	tuwxyae	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1265 \u257 \u1103 \u1099 \
tuya-	nez-	bob up and down		tuyaaq \'91he or it is bobbing, throbbing, shaking or shivering\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tuya\super e	\nosupersub throb	shake with suppressed laughter								shiver			to bob up and down; to throb; to shake with suppressed laughter; to shiver						tuya-	tuya-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1103 -\

\f1\b tuya\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nez\super s			\nosupersub tuuska \'91my shoulder\'92; tuyegka \'91my shoulders\'92; tuuynga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tuyanga \'91his shoulder\'92; tuuskek \'91his shoulders\'92													shoulder		PE tuy0				tuyae	tuyae	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1103 \u1099 \
tuyapegtagh-, tuyepegtagh-	nezgs[nf4-. neqsgs[nf4-	tremor (have a ~)															to have a tremor		< tuya\super e\nosupersub -?-				tuyapegtagh-, tuyepegtagh-	tuyapegtagh-, tuyepegtagh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -, \u1090 \u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
tuyeftu-	neqsane-	broad-shouldered (be ~)															to be broad-shouldered		< tuya\super e\nosupersub -?-tu-				tuyeftu-	tuyeftu-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1092 \u1090 \u1091 -\
tuyelliqe-	neqsk]b2s-	aching shoulders (have ~)															to have aching shoulders		< tuya\super e\nosupersub -lliqe-				tuyelliqe-	tuyelliqe-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
tuyepgha-	neqsgu5f-	jolt (boat, sled, wheeled vehicle, plane)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tuya\super e													\nosupersub to jolt (boat, sled, wheeled vehicle, plane)						tuyepgha-	tuyepgha-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1087 \u1075 \u1203 \u1072 -\
tuyugh-	ne/4-	send		tuyughtuq \'91he went to a join a boat crew\'92; tuyughaa \'91he sent it\'92 /	join (go to ~ a boat crew)												to send; to go to join a boat crew		PE tuyu3-				tuyugh-	tuyugh-	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1102 \u1271 -\
tuyuusaq	ne0cz2	package that has been sent															package that has been sent		< tuyugh-(u)saq				tuyusaq	tuyxsaq	\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1102 \u772 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
uflugh-	eak]/4-	run one's hand or fingers over (it)		uflughaa \'91he ran his hand over it\'92 / uflughiiq \'91he ran his hand over something\'92; = eflugh-													to run one's hand or fingers over (it)						uflugh-	uflugh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
uflughaagh-	eak]/464-	run one's hand over (it) repeatedly															to repeatedly run one's hand over (it)		< uflugh-?-				uflughagh-	uflughxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1092 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 -\
ufsug-	eac/u-	shake off dirt or snow		ufsugtuq \'91he is shaking himself off\'92; ufsugaa \'91he is cleaning the dirt or snow from her\'92 / ufsugutaa \'91he is cleaning it (garment or boat (turned upside down)) in this way\'92; = efsug-	brush off dirt or snow												to shake or brush off dirt or snow		PE 0vcu!-				ufsug-	ufsug-	\uc0\u1091 \u1092 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
ufsugun	eac/uey	stick used to knock snow or dirt off of garment, boots or boats		= ufsugutaq	snow-beater												stick used to knock snow or dirt off of garment, boots or boats; snow-beater		ufsug-(u)taq				ufsugutaq	ufsugutaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1092 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
ufsugutaq	eac/uenf2	stick used to knock snow or dirt off of garment, boots or boats		= ugsugun	snow-beater												stick used to knock snow or dirt off of garment, boots or boats; snow-beater		ufsug-(u)taq				ufsugutaq	ufsugutaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1092 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ufsulqutagh-	eac/k]2enf4-	flutter		ufsulqutaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ufsulqutaghaa \'91it is fluttering\'92 /													to flutter		< ufsug-?-				ufsulqutagh-	ufsulqutagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1092 \u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Ugaliit	Eufk7n	clan (a particular ~)		
\f2\i also called 
\f0\i0 Laakaghmiit													a particular clan						Ugalit	Ugalxt	\uc0\u1059 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1251 \u1090 \

\f1\b ugata\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub eufnf\super s	\nosupersub exit (area near ~ (of possessor))		ugatngani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ugatangani \'91in the area toward its exit\'92													area near the exit (of possessor)		PE u!an; < uga-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -				ugatae	ugatae	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1099 \
ugate-	eufns-	move toward exit (including where water exits to ocean)															to move (including where water exits to ocean)		< uga-te\super 2\nosupersub -				ugate-	ugate-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ugeyiighaq	eusq74f2	oldsquaw duck male			male oldsquaw duck	
\f2\i Clangula hyemalis
\f0\i0  male											male oldsquaw duck (Clangula hyemalis)						ugeyighaq	ugeyxghaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1253 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
uggiiy	e[7q	sigh of tiredness or frustration		
\f2\i exclamatory particle													
\f0\i0 sigh of tiredness or frustration						uggiy	uggxy	\uc0\u1091 \u1093 \u1251 \u1253 \

\f1\b ugharra\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub e4fif\super s	\nosupersub mud		Naangan pimakanga, "Kii, 
\f2\i ugharra
\f0\i0  uugna ilutmun ullghitaghtuq, naqam afsengaghestun gginalighluni." \'91His mother said to him, \'93Gee, that (ball of) 
\f2\i mud
\f0\i0  has rolled in here, with a face like a mouse.\'94\'92 (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 15)													mud		PE u33a3				ugharrae	ugharrae	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1096 \u1072 \u1099 \
ughhaaqghun	e5625ey	inset piece to enlarge a garment		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 inset piece to enlarge a garment				CK Rub 558		ughhaqghun	ughhxqghun	\uc0\u1091 \u1203 \u257 \u1179 \u1203 \u1091 \u1085 \
ughhe-	e5s-	urinate		ughhuq \'91he's urinating\'92; ughhaa \'91he's urinating on it\'92 /													to urinate		PE qu30-				ughhe-	ughhe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1203 \u1099 -\
ughhmaataq	e5v6nf2	urethra															urethra		< ughhe-?-(u)taq				ughhmataq	ughhmxtaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1203 \u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ughleghiigh-	e4ks474-	work very hard		ughleghiightuq \'91he is working very hard\'92 /	anguish (suffer ~)												to work very hard; to suffer anguish				second gloss from VK		ughleghigh-	ughleghxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1251 \u1271 -\
ughluveq	e4k/ds2	bow (as used with arrow)		Mekelghiighhaam iqa qerngughlluku, ulimamakanga yuggaq. Taaqumakanga. Taagken 
\f2\i ughluvengllaghluku
\f0\i0 , aaygungllaamakani. \'91The little boy gathered mud and fashioned a little man. He finished it. Then he made a 
\f2\i bow
\f0\i0  for it and arrows.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 61)													bow (as used with arrow)		PY-S u3luv03				ughluveq	ughluveq	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1083 \u1102 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \
ughluvin	e4k/dby	shaft of bow			bow (shaft of ~)	stretcher for sealskin made from whale rib (one side of stretcher)											shaft of bow; one side of sealskin-stretcher made from whale rib	leua kerf	< ughluveq-i\super 2\nosupersub -(u)n		CK V & E; Slwooko		ughluvin	ughluvin	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1083 \u1102 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \
ughnek	e4ysr	handiwork		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  ughnegek, 
\f2\i for one piece of work
\f0\i0 ; ughnega 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ughnegkek \'91her sewing, the thing she is sewing\'92; Ughnegegka pegllukek ggutangighyaghtughtunga. \'91I left my sewing and went to have a tooth pulled out.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 165)	sewing	that which one is working on											handiwork; sewing; that which one is working on		PE u3n0!-				ughnek	ughnek	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \
ughu	e4e	moss			menstrual pad												moss; menstrual pad		PE u39u3				ughu	ughu	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \
ughug-	e4eu-	melt		ughugtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ughugaa \'91it melted\'92 / ughugtaa \'91he melted it\'92; ughugtiiq \'91he melted something\'92; ughugutuq \'91it is emerging from being frozen in the ice\'92; Nekevghaanga maatneghsiisim saaghwani 
\f2\i ughugnalunga
\f0\i0 . \'91I stood by the radiator to 
\f2\i get warm
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 166)	thaw	warm up											to melt; to thaw; to warm up		PY-S u3u!-				ughug-	ughug-	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1075 -\
ughugesnaq	e4euscyf2	sleet			wet snow												sleet; wet snow		< ughug-?				ughugesnaq	ughugesnaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
ughugsigh-	e4e[cb4-	thaw (it)		ughugsightuq \'91he warmed himself up\'92; ughugsighaa \'91he thawed it out\'92 /	warm oneself												to thaw (it); to warm oneself		< ughug-sigh-				ughugsigh-	ughugsigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ughumaaghte-	e4ev65ns-	perspire			sweat												to perspire; to sweat		< ughug-?-				ughumaghte-	ughumxghte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1084 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ughumaangllagh-	e4ev63k]z4-	work up a sweat															to work up a sweat		< ughumaaghte-ngllagh-				ughumangllagh-	ughumxngllagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1084 \u257 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
ughumeruk	e4evsher	moss, fine															fine moss		< ughu-?-				ughumeruk	ughumeruk	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
ughunqightughte-	e4ey2b5ne5ns-	thawed patches occur		ughunqightughtemmi \'91when there are thawed patches\'92													for there to be thawed patches		< ughug-?-				ughunqightughte-	ughunqightughte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ughunqiq	e4ey2b2	melted spot			thawed spot	bare spot on ground where snow has melted											melted spot; thawed spot; bare spot on the ground where the snow has melted		< ughug-?-				ughunqiq	ughunqiq	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \
ughuun	e48y	melting ice field in spring, with surface elevations alternating with holes through to sea below		
\f2\i see item 86 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 204	sea ice type												melting ice field in spring, with surface elevations alternating with holes through to sea below		< ughug-?-(u)n				ughun	ughxn	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1263 \u1085 \
ughvik	e4dbr	scraper for skins, old style		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  ughvigek,
\f2\i  for one scraper													
\f0\i0 old-style scraper for skins		PY-S u3vik				ughvik	ughvik	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
ughvugh-	e4de4-	rinse		ughvughaa \'91he rinsed it\'92 /	wash one\'92s body												to rinse; to wash one\'92s body		PY-S 03vuqa3- (under PE 030-\super 1\nosupersub )				ughvugh-	ughvugh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1091 \u1271 -\
ughvughqe-	e4de52s-	bathe		ughvughquq \'91he bathed\'92; ughvughqaa \'91he bathed him\'92 /													to bathe		< ughvugh-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -; PY-S 03vuqa3- (under PE 030-\super 1\nosupersub )				ughvughqe-	ughvughqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ughvughqefik	e4de52sabr	place to take a bath			bathroom												place to take a bath; bathroom		< ughvughqe-vik				ughvughqefik	ughvughqefik	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \
ughvughqusiq	e4de52ecb2	bathtub		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  ughvughqusik, 
\f2\i for one bathtub													
\f0\i0 bathtub		< ughvughqe-(u)siq				ughvughqusiq	ughvughqusiq	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ughvuneq	e4deys2	ice (chunks of ~ that loosen and float up to the surface from underneath a field of ice in spring)		
\f2\i see item 87 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004													chunks of ice that loosen and float up to the surface from underneath a field of ice in spring		< ughvugh-neq\super 1				\nosupersub ughvuneq	ughvuneq	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
ughyugh-	e4m/4-	spit (on)		ughyughtuq \'91he spit\'92; ughyughaa \'91he spit on it\'92 / ughyuutaa \'91he spit it out\'92; Nguuyngaaghaq qanemnun iitqaaghsan 
\f2\i ughyuutaqa
\f0\i0 . \'91I 
\f2\i spit out
\f0\i0  the fly that went into my mouth.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 166)	water seeps out of ice												to spit (on); for water to seep out of ice		PE u3yu3- and u3ya3-				ughyugh-	ughyugh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1271 -\
ughyulleq	e4m/k]s2	spittle															spittle		< ughyugh-lleq				ughyulleq	ughyulleq	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
ughyuneq	e4m/ys2	ice shard			chalk	limestone								white excrescence on tundra			ice shard; chalk; limestone; white excrescence on tundra		< ughyugh-neq\super 1				\nosupersub ughyuneq	ughyuneq	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
ughyuqaghtagh-	e4qe2f5nf4-	spray		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 spill												to spray; to spill		< ughyugh-?-		CK Rub 527		ughyuqaghtagh-	ughyuqaghtagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1253 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ughyuusiq	e4m0cb2	spittoon															spittoon		< ughyugh-(u)siq				ughyusiq	ughyxsiq	\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ugi	eub	husband		uginga \'91her husband\'92; ugika \'91my husband\'92; ugilguuq \'91she has a husband\'92; ugingunani \'91(she) not having a husband\'92	male seal, walrus or reindeer												husband; male seal, walrus or reindeer		PE u!i				ugi	ugi	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \
ugighhe-	eub5s-	maul		ugighhaa \'91it fought it\'92 / ugighhiiq \'91it fought another dog or another animal or a person\'92; ugighhutut \'91they fought each other\'92; ugighhelleqaa \'91it will fight it\'92; ugighhelleq \'91scar from biting or fighting\'92	fight (of dogs)												to maul; to fight (of dogs)		PE u!i3(a3)-				ugighhe-	ugighhe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1203 \u1099 -\
ugighhniigh-	eub5y]74-	growl		ugighhniightuq \'91it snarled\'92; ugighhniighaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ugighhniighutaa \'91it snarled at it\'92	snarl												to growl; to snarl		PE u!i3anni- (under PE u!i3(a3)-); < ugighhe-niigh-				ugighhnigh-	ugighhnxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1203 \u1085 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 -\
ugighhughtaa-	eub5e5n6-	fight viciously		ugighhughtaagaa \'91it viciously fought it\'92 / 													to fight viciously		< ugighhe-?-				ugighhughta-	ugighhughtx-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1203 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u257 -\
ugighsagh-	eub5cz4-	fierce (be ~)		\'85 taawanginaq 
\f2\i ugighsalghiistun
\f0\i0  amaastun ayuqut. \'91\'85 inwardly they are like 
\f2\i ravenous
\f0\i0  wolves.\'92 (Matthew 7.15)													to be fierce		< ugighhe-yagh\super 1\nosupersub - or -sagh-				ugighsagh-	ugighsagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
ugiigh-	eu74-	husband (get a ~)		ugiightuq \'91she got a husband\'92 /	married (get ~ (of a woman))												to get a husband; to get married (of a woman)		< ugi-?-				ugigh-	ugxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1251 \u1271 -\
ugilgun	eubkuey	woman\'92s husband\'92s brother\'92s wife															woman\'92s husband\'92s brother\'92s wife		< ugi-lgun				ugilgun	ugilgun	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
ugingighaq	eub3b4f2	widow															widow		< ugi-(ng)igh-aq				ugingighaq	ugingighaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ugingwaaq	eub3162	exchange husband			husband (exchange ~)												exchange husband		< ugi-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				ugingwaq	ugingwxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1187 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
ugini	eubyb	roar of polar bear or other large animal															the roar of polar bear or other large animal						ugini	ugini	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \
ugini-	eubyb-	roar		uginiiq \'91it roared\'92 / uginitaa \'91it roared at it\'92	growl												to roar; to growl		PE u!i3anni- (under PE u!i3(a3)-)				ugini-	ugini-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 -\
ugiyulek	eub/ksr	woman who is said to be married to a dead man's spirit which provides for her															woman who is said to be married to a dead man's spirit which provides for her		< ugi-?-lek				ugiyulek	ugiyulek	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1080 \u1102 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \

\f1\b ugka\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub e[rf\super s	\nosupersub cooked food		ugkekaghqaq \'91food ready for cooking\'92													cooked food		PE u!uk0- (under PE u!u-)				ugkae	ugkae	\uc0\u1091 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1099 \
ugkelli-	e[rsk]b-	cut meat into pieces sized for cooking 															to cut meat into pieces sized for cooking 		PE u!ukli- (under PE u!u-); < ugka\super e\nosupersub -?-				ugkelli-	ugkelli-	\uc0\u1091 \u1093 \u1082 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
uglafqe-	eukza2s-	confused (get ~)		uglafquq \'91he got confused\'92; uglafqaa \'91he scattered it\'92 /	scatter	separate into parts (as when butchering a carcass)											to get confused; to scatter; to separate into parts (as when butchering a carcass)		< uglave-ghqe\super ?\nosupersub -				uglafqe-	uglafqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1092 \u1179 \u1099 -\
uglagh-	eukz4-	many (be ~)		uglalghiit \'91lots; many\'92; 
\f2\i may be used in the singular to indicate that a singular noun is being used for a plurality as in: 
\f0\i0 Sivuqami sikik 
\f2\i uglaghtuq. 
\f0\i0 \'91On St. Lawrence Is. there the squirrels 
\f2\i are numerous
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 3);
\f2\i   
\f0\i0 Tamaani 
\f2\i uglalghii
\f0\i0  maakumii qepghaatkaaguq \'85 \'91
\f2\i Many
\f0\i0  local people worked there \'85\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:52)	numerous (be ~)	much (be ~)											to be many; to be numerous; to be much		PE u!la3-				uglagh-	uglagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 -\
uglaghi-	eukz4b-	increase in number			multiply	more (become ~)											to increase in number; to multiply; to become more		< uglagh-(gh/l)i-				uglaghi-	uglaghi-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1080 -\
uglaghtala	eukz5nfkz	number of something			quantity of something												the number of something; the quantity of something		< uglagh-tala				uglaghtala	uglaghtala	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
uglaghyagaq	eukz4mzuf2	large group			group, large	crowd											large group; crowd		< uglaq-yaga				uglaghyagaq	uglaghyagaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
uglaq	eukz2	large number or amount		
\f2\i Uglaq
\f0\i0  mesiiq atuqaqaat nanimun, \'85. \'91They used 
\f2\i lots
\f0\i0  of oil for the lamps, \'85\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:112)	many	much								quantity, large			large number or amount; many; much; large quantity		PE u!la3-				uglaq	uglaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \
uglaqaghtagh-	eukz2f5nf4-	acquire lots of something															to acquire lots of something		< uglaq-?-				uglaqaghtagh-	uglaqaghtagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uglave-	eukzds-	spread out		uglavuq \'91it dispersed\'92 / uglavutut \'91they dispersed in different directions\'92; = ulave-; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  uglaq	disperse								ulave- in Siberia? Yes in Rub 522				to spread out; to disperse						uglave-	uglave-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1074 \u1099 -\
uglavngalghii	eukzd3fk47	ice floes, large and small, that have separated from each other, leaving much open water in between		
\f2\i see item 88 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												floes of ice, large and small, that have separated from each other, leaving much open water in between		< uglave-ng-lghii				uglavngalghi	uglavngalghx	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1074 \u1187 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
uglavniqe-	eukzdyb2s-	overwhelmed by a large number (be ~ (of tasks to be done, people, etc.))															to be overwhelmed by a large number (of tasks to be done, people, etc.)		< uglave-neq-liqe-				uglavniqe-	uglavniqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1074 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
uglavyug-	eukzdm/u-	overwhelmed by a large number (be ~ (of tasks to be done, people, etc.))															to be overwhelmed by a large number (of tasks to be done, people, etc.)		< uglave-yug-				uglavyug-	uglavyug-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1083 \u1103 \u1074 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
ugme-	euvs-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > ugmelghu, ugmelli-, ugmestaaghhaq, ugmitaghaq; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 umu-																			ugme-	ugme-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 -\
ugmelghu	euvsk4e	sea ice, thick		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 thick sea ice		< ugme-?-				ugmelghu	ugmelghu	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \
ugmelli-	euvsk]b-	thinner (become or make ~)															to become or make thinner		< ugme-(gh/l)i-				ugmelli-	ugmelli-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
ugmesiiq	euvsc72	flat (thing)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 flat (thing)		< ugme-?-		CK Rub 524		ugmesiq	ugmesxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
ugmestaaghhaq*	euvscn65f2	thin thing		ugmestaaghhaaguq \'91it is thin\'92													thin thing		< ugme-staaghhaq				ugmestaghhaq*	ugmestxghhaq*	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
ugmetaghaliq	euvsnf4fkb2	ceremony (traditional reindeer herders\'92 ~ held after coralling of reindeer)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E, R)													
\f0\i0 traditional reindeer herders\'92 ceremony held after coralling of reindeer	nhflbwbjyysq ghfplybr jkktytdjl gjckt pf,jz jktytq	< ugme-?-		CK V & E 98; Rub 524		ugmetaghaliq	ugmetaghaliq	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
ugmetaghaq	euvsnf4f2	ice (thin ~ where in some places one can walk, and in some places one cannot)		
\f2\i see item 89 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												thin ice where in some places one can walk, and in some places one cannot		< ugme-?-		CK Oozeva 89		ugmetaghaq	ugmetaghaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ugpegh-	e[gs4-	believe		ugpeghtuq \'91he believes, has become a Christian\'92 / ugpeghtaa \'91he made her believe\'92; ugpeghnaghtuq \'91it is believable\'92; ugpeghyugumaaq \'91he is gullible\'92	Christian (be or become a ~)	faith (have ~)											to believe; to be or become a Christian; to have faith		PE ukv03-				ugpegh-	ugpegh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1093 \u1087 \u1099 \u1271 -\
ugpeqaq	e[gs2f2	Christian		
\f2\i the meaning
\f0\i0  \'91cloth cover parka or snowshirt\'92 
\f2\i is Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0 Qiipaghaput maakut whatelnguut 
\f2\i Ugpeqameng
\f0\i0  atighluki aghniita. 
\f2\i Ugpeqaghhalegnunllu
\f0\i0  akingit tawaten. \'91Their [the Chukotkans\'92] women called the snowshirts we wore 
\f2\i \'93Christians\'94 
\f0\i0 [because they looked like ministers\'92 frocks]
\f2\i . 
\f0\i0 They would say, \'93I\'92d like to trade such and such for a 
\f2\i \'93Christian\'94
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:134); 
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 ugqeqak, 
\f2\i for one such snowshirt	
\f0\i0 believer	snowshirt								cloth cover parka			Christian; believer; cloth cover parka; snowshirt		< ugpegh-(g)kaq		CK V & E 91, Rub 557 CK 		ugpeqaq	ugpeqaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1093 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
ugpeqe-	e[gs2s-	believe (it or him)		ugpeqaa \'91he believes it or her\'92 /													to believe (it or him)		PE ukv0q0- (under PE ukv03-); < ugpegh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				ugpeqe-	ugpeqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1093 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ugraaq	euh62	herring gull			gull (herring ~)	
\f2\i Larus argentatus											
\f0\i0 herring gull (Larus argentatus)						ugraq	ugrxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
Ugriileq	Euh7ks2	Ureliki (former village site near ~ in Chukotka)		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village site near Ureliki in Chukotka						Ugrileq	Ugrxleq	\uc0\u1059 \u1075 \u1088 \u1251 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
ugtinghaq	e[nby4f2	red-dyed de-haired sealskin			sealskin, de-haired and dyed red												red-dyed de-haired sealskin						ugtinghaq	ugtinghaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ugu-	eue-	irritated (get ~ (of skin))		uuguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uugaa \'91it is burnt, irritated, ripe\'92 /	burnt (get ~)	ripen											to get irritated (of skin); to get burnt; to ripen		PE u!u-				ugu-	ugu-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 -\
ugugnaghaq*	eueuyf4f2	shrew			
\f2\i Sorex sp.												
\f0\i0 shrew 
\f2\i (Sorex sp.)		
\f0\i0 PE u!9u!na3 (under PE u!9u! \'91bearded seal\'92)				ugugnaghaq*	ugugnaghaq*	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
uguma-	euevf-	boiling (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E)													
\f0\i0 to be boiling		< ugu-(i/u)ma-		CK V & E 29; Rub 524		uguma-	uguma-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 -\
ugumi	euevb	annoying (how ~!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle													
\f0\i0 how annoying!		< ugumi-				ugumi	ugumi	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \
ugumi-	euevb-	hateful		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  ugumiyugtuq \'91he feels hatred, frustration or anger\'92; uguminaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uguminaghnaghtuq \'91he is frustrating, makes one feel anger\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91 it is cute\'92 (!); ugumiketaghtuq \'91he hates people, is misanthropic\'92; ugumiyagutaa \'91he is angry at it\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91 he finds it cute\'92 (!); Nagaquqaqaghsi whaten pilleq, \'93Piniqluki ilakumtaasi, 
\f2\i ugumikluki
\f0\i0  
\f2\i ugumikilghiit
\f0\i0  elpesineng.\'94 Iwernga whanga piimsi, \'93Piniqluki 
\f2\i ugumikilghiit
\f0\i0  elpesineng,\'94 \'91You\'92ve heard it said, \'93Love your friends, and 
\f2\i hate
\f0\i0  those who 
\f2\i hate
\f0\i0  you.\'94 But I say to you, \'93Love those who 
\f2\i hate
\f0\i0  you,\'94 (Matthew 5.43-44) 	angry	frustrated								cute (finding something ~)			hateful; angry; frustrated; finding something cute		PE u!umi-				ugumi-	ugumi-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 -\
ugumiite-	euev7ns-	angry (be ~ at)															to be angry at		< ugumi-?-(u)te-				ugumite-	ugumxte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ugumikeraagh-	euevbrsh64-	reject at play			treat badly												to reject at play; to treat badly		< ugumi-?-		CK Rub 524 CK		ugumikeragh-	ugumikerxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
uguminaghhalek	euevbyf5fksr	annoying (how ~!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle													
\f0\i0 how annoying!		< ugumi-naq-ghhalek				uguminaghhalek	uguminaghhalek	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
uguminaqruggalek	euevbyf2ie[fksr	hateful (how ~!)		
\f2\i exclamatory particle	
\f0\i0 discouraging (how ~!)												how hateful!; how discouraging!		< ugumi-naq-ruk-ghhalek				uguminaqruggalek	uguminaqruggalek	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1096 \u1091 \u1093 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
uguminqe-	euevby2s-	angry (be very ~)															to be very angry		< ugumi-?-				uguminqe-	uguminqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1085 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ugumiqrutun	euevbrieney	disgustingly		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); particle									
\f0\i0 check to see if used on SLI				in a disgusting way	ghjnbdyj	< ugumi-?-
\f2\i equalis		
\f0\i0 Rub. 524		ugumiqrutun	ugumiqrutun	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \u1096 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
ugumisaate-	euevbc9ns-	anger (stir up ~ against)															to stir up anger against		< ugumi-sagh-(u)te-				ugumisate-	ugumisxte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uguqe-	eue2s-	burn one's flesh		uguqelleq \'91burn on the flesh\'92 													to burn one's flesh		< ugu-?-				uguqe-	uguqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
uguqnagh-	eue2y]f4-	hot (be burning ~)		uguqnaghtuq \'91it is burning hot\'92 /	burning hot (be ~)												to be burning hot		< uguqe-nagh-				uguqnagh-	uguqnagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ugusaghqaq	euecz52f2	cooked thoroughly (something that is to be ~)															something that is to be cooked thoroughly		< ugute-yaghqaq				ugusaghqaq	ugusaghqaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
ugute-	euens-	done (get ~ (in cooking))		ugutuq \'91it is done, cooked\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is finished cooking\'92 / ugutaa \'91he finished cooking it\'92 /	cook or be cooked												to get done (in cooking); to cook or be cooked		PE u!ut- (under PE u!u-); < ugu-te\super 1\nosupersub -				ugute-	ugute-	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b ugutelnga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub euensk3f\super s	\nosupersub chain		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the plural,
\f0\i0  ugutelnget
\f2\i , for one chain													
\f0\i0 chain		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 525		ugutelngae	ugutelngae	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1072 \u1099 \
ugutkaq	euenrf2	cooked food															cooked food		< ugute-(g)kaq				ugutkaq	ugutkaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
uka	erf	this way		
\f2\i look under 
\f0\i0 uukna; ukani \'91in the area toward here\'92	here (toward ~)												this way; toward here						uka	uka	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \
ukaaq	er62	son\'92s wife		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ukughhaq	daughter-in-law	brother\'92s wife								sister-in-law (brother\'92s wife)			son's wife (daughter-in-law); brother's wife (sister-in-law)		PE uku3a3				ukaq	ukxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u257 \u1179 \
ukaliq	erfkb2	one on this side			person at the bottom of the social scale												one on this side; person at the bottom of the social scale		< uka-liq				ukaliq	ukaliq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
ukamaataq	erfv6nf2	towline															towline		< ukamagh-(u)taq		CK Rub 531		ukamataq	ukamxtaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ukamagh-	erfvf4-	tow a boat by walking along the shore		ukamaghtuq \'91he is towing a boat\'92; ukamaghaa \'91he is towing it\'92 /													to tow a boat by walking along the shore		PE ukama3-				ukamagh-	ukamagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ukapighqaagh-	erfgb5264-	move closer			closer (move ~)												to move closer		< uka-?-				ukapighqagh-	ukapighqxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u257 \u1271 -\
ukatghute-	erfn5ens-	miss the mark by one's shot falling short			undershoot												to miss the mark by one's shot falling short; to undershoot		< uka-tghute-				ukatghute-	ukatghute-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ukavagh-	erfdf4-	nearer (come or bring ~)		ukavaghtuq \'91it came nearer\'92 / ukavaghtaa \'91he brought it nearer, lessened it\'92; anuqa ukavaghtaa \'91the wind died down\'92	approach	lessen in value								demoted (be ~)			to come nearer; to approach; to lessen in value; to be demoted		< uka-vagh-				ukavagh-	ukavagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ukazighaq	erfpb4f2	baby hare			hare baby	baby rabbit								\'93rabbit\'94 (hare) baby			baby rabbit (hare)		< ukaziq-ghaq				ukazighaq	ukazighaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ukazighniigh-, ukazighyagh-	erfpb4y74-. erfpb4z4-	hunt rabbits (hare)															to hunt rabbits (hare)		< ukaziq-niigh-, ukaziq-yagh\super \'a3\nosupersub -				ukazighnigh-, ukazighyagh-	ukazighnxgh-, ukazighyagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -, \u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 \u1103 \u1271 -\
ukaziq	erfpb2	snowshoe hare		
\f2\i the snowshoe hare is found in Chukotka but not on St. Lawrence Is.; 
\f0\i0 Tawaten 
\f2\i ukazighhaq
\f0\i0  igiighsimakangat siqineghmeng teglegesqelluku. \'91Then they encouraged the little 
\f2\i hare
\f0\i0  and told him to go steal the sun.\'92 (YUPIGET UNGIP. 31)	hare, snowshoe	
\f2\i Lepus americanus								
\f0\i0 \'93rabbit\'94 (hare)			snowshoe hare
\f2\i  (Lepus americanus); 
\f0\i0 rabbit 
\f2\i (locally)		
\f0\i0 PE uka9i3				ukaziq	ukaziq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1179 \
uki-	erb-	hole (get a ~)		ukiiq \'91it got a hole in it\'92 / ukitaa \'91he made a hole in it\'92; ukimaaq \'91it has a hole\'92													to get a hole		PE uki-\super 2				\nosupersub uki-	uki-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 -\
ukifkagh-	erbarf4-	puncture															to puncture		< uki-fka3-		CK Rub 533 CK		ukifkagh-	ukifkagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ukig-	erbu-	go down		ukigtuq \'91he went down\'92 / ukigtaa \'91he took it down\'92; ukigvikaa \'91he went down it or via it\'92; ukigutaa \'91he brought it down\'92	descend (an incline)												to go down; to descend (an incline)						ukig-	ukig-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1075 -\
ukigagh-	erbuf4-	go up and down a cliff on a rope, especially when gathering eggs															to go up and down a cliff on a rope, especially when gathering eggs		< ukig-?-				ukigagh-	ukigagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
Ukigyaghaq	Erbumz4f2	Nayvak  (former village at the southwestern corner of ~ (the lagoon with old Chaplino is at the eastern corner) in Chukotka)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village at the southwestern corner of Nayvak (the lagoon with old Chaplino at its eastern corner) in Chukotka		< ukig-yaghaq				Ukigyaghaq	Ukigyaghaq	\uc0\u1059 \u1082 \u1080 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
Ukiivak	Er7dfr	King Island		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 King Island						Ukivak	Ukxvak	\uc0\u1059 \u1082 \u1251 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
ukileghyak	erbks4zr	spotted animal or skin															spotted animal or skin		< uki-?-				ukileghyak	ukileghyak	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1103 \u1082 \
ukimalleq	erbvfk]s2	hole		
\f2\i intentionally made	
\f0\i0 pit												hole; pit		< uki-(i/u)ma-lleq				ukimalleq	ukimalleq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
ukini-	erbyb-	sew		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to sew		< uki-neq\super 2\nosupersub -i\super 2\nosupersub -				ukini-	ukini-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 -\
ukinista	erbybcnf	seamstress		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 seamstress	idtz	< ukini-(s)ta		CK V & E 100		ukinista	ukinista	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
ukinivik	erbybdbr	sewing workshop		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 sewing workshop	idtqyfz vfcnthcrfz	< ukini-vik		Rub. 532		ukinivik	ukinivik	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
ukiqrugh-	erb2ie4-	holes (get lots of ~)															to get lots of holes		< uki-?-				ukiqrugh-	ukiqrugh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1179 \u1096 \u1091 \u1271 -\
ukiqute-	erb2ens-	poke through by making holes in what covers it			show through by making holes in what covers it												to poke through or show through by making holes in what covers it		< uki-?-				ukiqute-	ukiqute-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ukistagh-	erbcnf4-	ice pick (spud) (use an ~)															to use an ice pick (spud)						ukistagh-	ukistagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ukistaq	erbcnf2	ice pick (spud)															ice pick (spud)		< uki-?-				ukistaq	ukistaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ukite-	erbns-	hole (make ~ in (it))		ukitaa \'91he made a hole in it\'92 / ukiqughaa \'91he made holes in it\'92	pierce												to make hole in (it); to pierce		PE ukit- (under  PE uki-\super 2\nosupersub )				ukite-	ukite-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ukivagh-	erbdf4-	approach		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to approach	ghb,kb;fnmcz r xtve-k>. rjve-k>			Rub. 532		ukivagh-	ukivagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uklesa	erk]scf	zipper															zipper		from English \'91hookless\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 161		uklesa	uklesa	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1089 \u1072 \
ukma-	erv]f-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > ukmangigh-, ukmangite-																			ukma-	ukma-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 -\
ukmangigh-	erv]f3b4-	clean (remove dirt)		Egllumta gaarineghqek 
\f2\i ukmangighagka
\f0\i0 . \'91I 
\f2\i cleaned out
\f0\i0  our stove\'92s ashes.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 50)													to clean		< ukma-(ng)igh				ukmangigh-	ukmangigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ukmangiisiq	ervf37cb2	cleaning apparatus or supply		
\f2\i used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 ukmangiisit
\f2\i , for a set of cleaning equipment and supplies													
\f0\i0 cleaning apparatus or supply		< ukmangigh-(u)siq				ukmangisiq	ukmangxsiq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1251 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ukmangite-	erv]f3bns-	clean (be ~)			immaculate (be ~)												to be clean; to be immaculate		< ukma-(ng)ite-				ukmangite-	ukmangite-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1084 \u1100 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uksaagh-	erc94-	autumn (be ~)															to be autumn						uksagh-	uksxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
uksaaghte-	erc95ns-	autumn (spend the ~)															to spend the autumn		< uksaaq-te\super 2\nosupersub -				uksaghte-	uksxghte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uksaaq	erc92	autumn		uksaaq 
\f2\i as a particle: \'91
\f0\i0 last autumn\'92	fall season												autumn; fall season		PE ukyu3a3 (under PE ukyu3); < uksuq-?				uksaq	uksxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
uksaaqestagh-	erc92scnf4-	autumn begins															for autumn to begin		< uksaaq-?-				uksaqestagh-	uksxqestagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uksaaqun	erc92ey	autumn (next ~)		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 next autumn												next autumn		< uksaaq-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 uksaqun	uksxqun	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
uksugh-	erc/4-	winter (be ~)															to be winter						uksugh-	uksugh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\
uksughqestaaq	erc/52scn62	place having short winters															place having short winters		< uksuq-?-staaghhaq				uksughqestaq	uksughqestxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
uksughte-	erc/5ns-	winter (spend the ~)															to spend the winter		< uksuq-te\super 2\nosupersub -				uksughte-	uksughte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uksughtelleq	erc/5nsk]s2	year															year		< uksuq-te\super 2\nosupersub -lleq\super 1		\nosupersub SLI Cur. Res. Man. 143		uksughtelleq	uksughtelleq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
uksughtutala	erc/5nenfkz	age (one\'92s ~)		uksughtutalanganeng aaptaqa \'91I asked him about his age\'92													one's age		< uksuq-tu-tala				uksughtutala	uksughtutala	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
uksulla	erc/k]z	common eider		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  uksuq	eider, common	
\f2\i Somateria mollissima											
\f0\i0 common eider (Somateria mollissima)						uksulla	uksulla	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
uksuq	erc/2	winter		uksumi \'91in the winter\'92; uksulqusiq \'91all winter\'92; uksuq 
\f2\i as a particle, 
\f0\i0 \'91last winter\'92	year	last winter											winter; year; last winter						uksuq	uksuq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \
uksuqaate-	erc/26ns-	caught by winter (be ~)															to be caught by winter		< uksuq-?-				uksuqate-	uksuqxte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uksuqun	erc/2ey	winter (next ~)		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 next winter												next winter		< uksuq-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 uksuqun	uksuqun	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
ukughhaq	ere5f2	bride, new, who has recently moved in with her husband's family		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ukaaq													new bride who has recently moved in with her husband's family		PE uku3a3				ukughhaq	ukughhaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
ukughhite-	ere5bns-	married (have recently ~ and moved in with one's husband's family)															to have recently married and moved in with one's husband's family		< ukughhaq-li-te\super 3\nosupersub -				ukughhite-	ukughhite-	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ukughsi, ukughsiiy	ere5cb. ere5c7q	hey you (plural)!		
\f2\i vocative particle; look under 
\f0\i0 una	you (hey ~ (plural)!)												hey you (plural)!						ukughsi, ukughsiy	ukughsi, ukughsxy	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 , \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1253 \
ukukuk	ererer	ouch!		
\f2\i exclamatory particle													
\f0\i0 ouch!	fq-fq			Rub. 535		ukukuk	ukukuk	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1082 \
ukut	eren	these		
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  una													these						ukut	ukut	\uc0\u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \
ulaagh-	ek94-	align so that (it -- narrow object) can enter an opening			turn edgewise or on its side												to align so that (it -- narrow object) can enter an opening; to turn edgewise or on its side		PE ulu3-				ulagh-	ulxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
Ulaaghnarraak	Ek94yfi6r	Oolamushak Hill on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Oolamushak Hill on St. Lawrence Is.		< ulaaq-?-rraak; cf. PE -na3 \'91something resembling\'92				Ulaghnarrak	Ulxghnarrxk	\uc0\u1059 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1096 \u257 \u1082 \
Ulaaghpak	Ek95gfr	Oolahpuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Oolahpuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		< ulaaq-ghpak				Ulaghpak	Ulxghpak	\uc0\u1059 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
ulaapsak	ek9gczr	woman\'92s semi-lunar knife, small		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 small woman\'92s semi-lunar knife		< ulaaq-?		CK Rub 540		ulapsak	ulxpsak	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1087 \u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
ulaaq	ek92	woman\'92s semi-lunar knife		\'85 
\f2\i ulaaghmineng
\f0\i0  pilagaghsaqminikek ratamiirak vegaaq pagunghaq ifkaquusimalghii. \'91\'85 \'91when she slashed the parka with her big 
\f2\i Eskimo knife
\f0\i0 , out fell grass and berries.\'92 (SULUWET 80); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ulag-	semi-lunar knife	knife, woman\'92s semi-lunar								ulu			woman's semi-lunar knife; ulu		PE ulu(3) and ulu3a3				ulaq	ulxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
ulag-	ekzu-	cut with a woman's semi-lunar knife		ulagaa \'91he cut it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 ulaaq													to cut with a woman's semi-lunar knife						ulag-	ulag-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 -\
Ulaghpen	Ekz4gsy	Sireniki in Chukotka (mountain near ~)		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 mountain near Sireniki in Chukotka				CK		Ulaghpen	Ulaghpen	\uc0\u1059 \u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \
ulakitaagh-	ekzrbn64-	tag (play ~)		ulakitaaghtuq \'91he played tag\'92; ulakitaaghaa \'91he tagged him\'92 /													to tag; to play tag		PY ulakitaa3-				ulakitagh-	ulakitxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
ulakitaaq	ekzrbn62	game of tag															game of tag						ulakitaq	ulakitxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
ulangkiiq	ekz3r72	parting ritual of young people where each tries to be the last to touch the other		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ulakitaagh-													parting ritual of young people where each tries to be the last to touch the other						ulangkiq	ulangkxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1187 \u1082 \u1251 \u1179 \
ulape-	ekzgs-	exercise physically outdoors		ulapuq \'91he exercised\'92 / ulapfik \'91place to exercise\'92	strengthen oneself												to exercise physically outdoors; to strengthen oneself		PE ulap0(t)-				ulape-	ulape-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1087 \u1099 -\
ulave-	ekzds-	spread out		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  = uglave-; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  uglaq	disperse								ulave- in Siberia? Yes in Rub 522				to spread out; to disperse						ulave-	ulave-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1103 \u1074 \u1099 -\
ulevaghaghte-	eksdf4f5ns-	laden (be fully ~)		ulevaghaghtuq \'91it is full\'92; ulevaghaghtaa \'91he filled it up\'92 / Entaqun maaken angyaghpaga 
\f2\i ulevaghaghngaaqelghii
\f0\i0  akilpegameng. \'91Maybe his ship would be 
\f2\i loaded full up
\f0\i0  with trade goods.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:134)	load full up												to be fully laden; to load full up						ulevaghaghte-	ulevaghaghte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uleve-	eksds-	flood		ulevuq \'91it overflowed\'92 / ulevutaa \'91it overflowed on it, flooded it\'92; uleftaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ulevestaa \'91he made it overflow\'92	overflow												to flood; to overflow		PE ul0-				uleve-	uleve-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1074 \u1099 -\
ulghaaghaghaq	ek464f4f2	sea lion, young			
\f2\i Eumetopias jubatus 
\f0\i0 (seal lion) young												young sea lion 
\f2\i (Eumetopias jubatus)		
\f0\i0 < ulghaaq-aghaq				ulghaghaghaq	ulghxghaghaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ulghaaq	ek462	sea lion			
\f2\i Eumetopias jubatus												
\f0\i0 sea lion 
\f2\i (Eumetopias jubatus)		
\f0\i0 PY ul3uaq				ulghaq	ulghxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u257 \u1179 \
ulig-	ekbu-	cover with a blanket		uligtuq \'91he covered himself with a blanket\'92; uligaa \'91he put a blanket on it\'92 / taghnughhaam uligutaa qikmighaghhaq \'91the child blanketed the little puppy along with himself\'92													to cover with a blanket						ulig-	ulig-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1075 -\
uliigh-	ek74-	put on hunting boots															to put on hunting boots						uligh-	ulxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
uliiq	ek72	hunting-boot, man's waterproof, sealskin, knee-high, fur-out															man's waterproof, sealskin, knee-high, fur-out hunting-boot						uliq	ulxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1179 \
ulik	ekbr	blanket															blanket		PE uli!(-)				ulik	ulik	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1082 \
ulima-	ekbvf-	make		ulimaaq \'91he made something\'92; ulimaa \'91he made it\'92 / Igaghvik taaqaghput 
\f2\i ulimaneghmeng
\f0\i0 . \'91We completed 
\f2\i building
\f0\i0  the school.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 167); Mekelghiighem ullghitangi naavegkak 
\f2\i ulimaak
\f0\i0 . \'91The boy 
\f2\i fixed
\f0\i0  his broken wheeled/tracked vehicle.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT 168)	build	carve								fix			to make; to build; to carve; to fix		PE ulima-				ulima-	ulima-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 -\
ulimaaq	ekbv62	something made		Estugaghmi 
\f2\i ulimaaq
\f0\i0  allaghhiinaq esghaghaqa. \'91At the store I saw various kinds of 
\f2\i ivory carvings
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 168)	product	ivory carving								carving of ivory			something made; product; ivory carving		< ulima-aq				ulimaq	ulimxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u257 \u1179 \
Ulimaghista	Ekbvf4bcnf	God		Nuna ulimaneghmeng taaqsamigu, 
\f2\i Ulimaghista
\f0\i0  meghnaalikaq, ulimaani yuvghiiqaa. \'91When He had finished creating the world, 
\f2\i God
\f0\i0  rested, examining His creation.\'92 (KALLAG. 1)	Creator												God; the Creator		< ulima-(gh/l)i-(s)ta				Ulimaghista	Ulimaghista	\uc0\u1059 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
ulimanqegsagh-	ekbvfy2s[cz4-	redo			correct												to redo; to correct		< ulima-nqegsagh- 				ulimanqegsagh-	ulimanqegsagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
ulimasiitek	ekbvfc7nsr	vice (for holding object being worked on)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); this is a dual; the singular would be 
\f0\i0 ulimasiita 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ulimasiin													vice (for holding object being worked on)	nbcrb	< ulimasiq -(u)n -dual		Rub. 538		ulimasitek	ulimasxtek	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \
ulimasiq	ekbvfcb2	tool															tool		< ulima-(u)siq				ulimasiq	ulimasiq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
ulimasta	ekbvfcnf	maker			sire												maker; sire		< ulima-(s)ta				ulimasta	ulimasta	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
ulimavik	ekbvfdbr	workshop			factory												workshop; factory		< ulima-vik				ulimavik	ulimavik	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1084 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
ullegh-	ek]s4-	fall over		ulleghtuq \'91it fell over\'92/ ulleghtaa \'91he made it fall over, knocked it over\'92; uulqan \'91if it falls over\'92; uullghaghtuq \'91it suddenly or unexpectedly fell over\'92													to fall over		PE u@03- and u@3u-				ullegh-	ullegh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 -\
ulleviik	ek]sd7r	cage		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 cage				CK Rub 541		ullevik	ullevxk	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1251 \u1082 \
ullevikak	ek]sdbrfr	can, tin		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 tin can				CK Rub 541		ullevikak	ullevikak	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \
ullghitagh-	ek]5bnf4-	roll		ullghitaghtuq \'91it rolled\'92 / ullghitaghtaa \'91he rolled it\'92; ullghitaghtaghtuq \'91it keeps rolling\'92													to roll		< ullegh-?-				ullghitagh-	ullghitagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ullghitaq	ek]5bnf2	car		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  ullghitak, 
\f2\i for one such vehicle	
\f0\i0 wheeled and/or tracked vehicle	all-terrain vehicle (ATV)								snow machine			car; wheeled and/or tracked vehicle; all-terrain vehicle (ATV); snow machine						ullghitaq	ullghitaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ullungak	ek]/3fr	cheek		ullungagegka \'91my cheeks\'92; Kitum qasaghtekangaten 
\f2\i ullungagpegun
\f0\i0  inglungallu tuunaken. \'91If someone slaps you on your 
\f2\i cheek
\f0\i0 , give him the other one too.\'92 (Matthew 5.39)													cheek		PE u@u!a!				ullungak	ullungak	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \
ulluviighraghaqetaq	ek]/d74hf4f2snf2	square															square		< ulluviiq-?-				ulluvighraghaqetaq	ulluvxghraghaqetaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1074 \u1251 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ulluviiq	ek]/d72	rectangle			quadrangle	board								square			square; rectangle; quadrangle; board						ulluviq	ulluvxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1074 \u1251 \u1179 \
ulluvikaq	ek]/dbrf2	gas can, rectangular five-gallon		
\f2\i may be used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 ulluvikak,
\f2\i  for one
\f0\i0  
\f2\i can; Ulluvikameng
\f0\i0  egllungllaghtunga. \'91I made a stove out of a 
\f2\i five-gallon can
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 45)													rectangular five-gallon gas can						ulluvikaq	ulluvikaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
ulmig-	ekvbu-	turned over		
\f2\i postural root;
\f0\i0  ulmigtaa \'91he turned it inside out\'92; ulmigngaaq \'91it is inside out\'92	inside out												turned over; inside out		PE ul0t- 				ulmig-	ulmig-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
ulmighte-	ekvb5ns-	pull back the bowstring preparatory to firing an arrow		Mekelghiighhaam 
\f2\i ulmighulluku
\f0\i0  sikik riigtenganeng nuuneghsighaa. \'91The little boy 
\f2\i pulled back the bowstring
\f0\i0  waiting for the squirrel to peek out of its den.\'92 (SULUWET 109)													to pull back the bowstring preparatory to firing an arrow		PY ulmi3t0- (?)				ulmighte-	ulmighte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ulmigmun	ekvbuvey	opposite direction (in the ~)		
\f2\i adverbial particle													
\f0\i0 in the opposite direction		< ulmig-terminalis				ulmigmun	ulmigmun	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
ulpeg-	ek]gsu-	folded back on itself (like a turned up pants leg)		
\f2\i postural root; 
\f0\i0 ulpegtaa \'91he folded it back on itself\'92; ulpegngaaq \'91it is folded back on itself\'92													folded back on itself (like a turned up pants leg)		PE ul0t-				ulpeg-	ulpeg-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1075 -\
ulpegte-, ulpig-	ek]gs[ns-. ek]gbu-	run with all one's might															to run with all one's might		PE ulp0!- or ulp0t- (under PE ul0t-)				ulpegte-, ulpig-	ulpegte-, ulpig-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -, \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 -\
ulu	ek/	tongue		ulunga \'91his tongue\'92; Aghnaghaq, taghtughyalghiimi, aleghquullghiit nagasimakangi. 
\f2\i Ulu
\f0\i0  allaghhiinaq. \'91Upon awakening the girl heard people speaking. All different 
\f2\i languages
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 69)	language	interpreter								translator			tongue; language; interpreter; translator		PY-S ulu(q)				ulu	ulu	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \
ulug-	ek/u-	soften skin, paper, etc., by flexing it with a circular motion of the hands		ulugtuq \'91he softened a skin\'92; ulugaa \'91he softened it\'92 /													to soften skin, paper, etc., by flexing it with a circular motion of the hands		PE ulu!-				ulug-	ulug-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1075 -\

\f1\b ululaay, ululaaya\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ek/k9q. ek/k9z\super s	\nosupersub legendary monster			monster, legendary												a certain legendary monster						ululay, ululayae	ululxy, ululxyae	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1253 , \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1103 \u1099 \
ululiqe-, ululliqe-	ek/kb2s-. ek/k]b2s-	sarcastic (be ~)			speak inappropriately												to be sarcastic; to speak inappropriately		< ulu-liqe-				ululiqe-, ululliqe-	ululiqe-, ululliqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -, \u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ulullugmelnguq*	ek/k]/uvsk3e2	loudmouth			quarrels (one who starts ~ by his unpleasant use of language)												one who starts quarrels by his unpleasant use of language; loudmouth		< ulu-lluk-melnguq				ulullugmelnguq*	ulullugmelnguq*	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \

\f1\b ulungaaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ek/362\super \'a1\nosupersub  	uvula															uvula		< ulu-?-				ulungaq1	ulungxq1	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u257 \u1179 1\

\f1\b ulungaaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ek/362\super \'99	\nosupersub knife (stone ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 aghnat uyghagmeng ulaaqelghiit aatghi ulungaaghet \'91the women have stone 
\f2\i ulaaq
\f0\i0 -s, that are called 
\f2\i ulungaaq
\f0\i0 -s\'92													stone knife				CK Rub 539		ulungaq2	ulungxq2	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u257 \u1179 2\
ulungestaq	ek/3scnf2	uvula															uvula		< ulu-ngestaq				ulungestaq	ulungestaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
ulungigh-	ek/3b4-	silent (become ~)			stop talking												to become silent; to stop talking		< ulu-(ng)igh-				ulungigh-	ulungigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ulungite-	ek/3bns-	silent (be ~)			speechless (be ~)												to be silent; to be speechless		< ulu-(ng)ite-				ulungite-	ulungite-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uluraaghinagh-	ek/h64byf4-	communicate orally															to communicate orally		< ulu-?-(ng)inagh-				uluraghinagh-	ulurxghinagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uluzik	ek/pbr	tongue of whale		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 tongue of whale	zpsr rbnf	< ulu-?		Rub. 539		uluzik	uluzik	\uc0\u1091 \u1083 \u1102 \u1079 \u1080 \u1082 \
umeg-	evsu-	close		umegtuq \'91it closed\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91the weather closed in\'92; uumgaa \'91he closed it\'92 / umegngaaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uumgumaaq \'91it is closed\'92	close door	shut								weather closes in			to close; to close door; to shut; for weather to close in		PE um0!-				umeg-	umeg-	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1075 -\
umegneq	evsuys2	blizzard		umegneghughtuq \'91it has become a blizzard; a blizzard has started up\'92													blizzard		< umegte-neq\super 2				\nosupersub umegneq	umegneq	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
umegreghaq	evsuhs4f2	snow flurries			flurries of snow												snow flurries		< umeg-vreghaq				umegreghaq	umegreghaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1075 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
umegte-	evs[ns-	stormy (get ~)															to get stormy		< umeg-?-				umegte-	umegte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
umek	evsr	lid		qulmesiitem uumga \'91the pot\'92s lid\'92	cover	door								stopper			lid; cover; door; stopper		PE um0!(-)				umek	umek	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \
umek	evsr	box		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  uumgek,
\f2\i  for one container	
\f0\i0 container for small items												box; container for small items		PE um0!				umek	umek	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \
Umeyaalek	Evs9ksr	Oomeyaluk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices; 
\f0\i0 = Emeyaalak									are Umeyaalek and Emeyaalak really the same? check				Oomeyaluk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.		< ?-lek				Umeyalek	Umeyxlek	\uc0\u1059 \u1084 \u1099 \u1103 \u772 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
umiilek	ev7ksr	leader		Ungazighmiit neghllaget 
\f2\i umiilgat
\f0\i0  \'96 amyuqetalghii , aatgha Qalu. \'91The many households of the people of the Ungazighmiit (Chaplino) had a 
\f2\i boss
\f0\i0  \'96 a tyrant, and his name was Qalu.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 25); \'85 qayughllak neghllakaa 
\f2\i Umiilegpagllagem
\f0\i0 . \'91\'85 because it is the dwelling place of the great 
\f2\i King
\f0\i0 .\'92 (Matthew 5.35)	boss	captain								king			leader; boss; captain; king		from Inupiaq umialik 'one with a boat, captain' (e rather than i in the Yupik form indicates that the Inupiaq was analyzed while being borrowed)				umilek	umxlek	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1251 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
umkughaq	evre4f2	door															door		PE umku3a3; < umek-?-				umkughaq	umkughaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
Umqilir	Ev2bkbh	Wrangel Island (well northwest of the Yupik area)		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Wrangel Island (well northwest of the Yupik area)		from Chukchi ? (prefix plus ilir \'91island\'92)	x			Umqilir	Umqilir	\uc0\u1059 \u1084 \u1179 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1088 \
umqughaq	ev2e4f2	cover		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 lid												cover; lid		< umek-?-		CK Rub 542		umqughaq	umqughaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
umsighqe-	evcb52s-	mend		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 sew up												to mend; to sew up	xbybnm. pfibdfnm xnj-k>			Rub. 542		umsighqe-	umsighqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1089 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
umu-	eve-	thick (be ~ (of ice, paper, etc.)		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 ugme-	sleep dreamily												to be thick (of ice, paper, etc.); to sleep dreamily		PE um9u-				umu-	umu-	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1091 -\
umughak	eve4fr	ice thick enough to walk on		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  umughagek, 
\f2\i for ice of this sort
\f0\i0 ; 
\f2\i see items 90, 91 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												ice thick enough to walk on		< umu-?				umughak	umughak	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1082 \
umughqaa-	eve526-	sleep  paralysis (experience ~ (a condition where one feels paralyzed upon wakening or partially wakening))		umughqaaguq \'91he is experiencing sleep paralysis\'92 /	paresthesia (experience ~ ("pins and needles" feeling in part of the body)	\'93pins and needles\'94 feeling (have ~ in part of the body)								thicken			to experience sleep paralysis (a condition where one feels paralyzed upon wakening or partially wakening); to experience paresthesia ("pins and needles" feeling in part of the body); to thicken		< umu-?-				umughqa-	umughqx-	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u257 -\
umukesugnite-	eversc/uybns-	dull (be ~)			slow at learning  (be ~)	clumsy (be ~)											to be dull; to be slow at learning; clumsy	ytkjdrbq. ytgjdjhjnkbdsq	< umu-?-sugnite-		CK V & E 130 (voc, russ)		umukesugnite-	umukesugnite-	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
umuqaq	eve2f2	thick thing															thick thing	njkcnsq	< umu-qaq				umuqaq	umuqaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
umuqun	eve2ey	lining for garment		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 lining for garment		< umu-?-(u)n		CK Rub 542		umuqun	umuqun	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
umututala	evenenfkz	thickness		sikum umututalanga \'91the thickness of the ice\'92													thickness		< umu-tu-tala				umututala	umututala	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
umyugaghlliqe-	evm/uf5k]b2s-	contrary or difficult in disposition (be ~)															to be contrary or difficult in disposition		< umyugaq-lliqe-				umyugaghlliqe-	umyugaghlliqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
umyugaghsi-	evm/uf5cb-	unauthorized (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E)													
\f0\i0 to be unauthorized	cfvjdjkmybxfnm	< umyugaq-?		CK V & E 173; Rub 543		umyugaghsi-	umyugaghsi-	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 -\
umyugalek	evm/ufksr	sensible person			mind (one with a good ~)												one with a good mind; sensible person		< umyugaq-lek				umyugalek	umyugalek	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
umyugange-	evm/uf3s-	mature in mentality (become ~)															to become mature in mentality		< umyugaq-nge-				umyugange-	umyugange-	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 -\
umyugaq	evm/uf2	mind		
\f2\i may be used in the dual,
\f0\i0  umyugak, 
\f2\i for one person\'92s mind, as in,
\f0\i0  umyugagka ataasiightagka \'91I made up my mind\'92													mind		PY-S umyu!$aq				umyugaq	umyugaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
umyugaqegtaq	evm/uf2s[nf2	sensitive person			thoughtful person												sensitive person; thoughtful person	c [jhjibv [fhfrnthjv	< umyugaq-kegtaq		CK V & E 132 (Russ voc)		umyugaqegtaq	umyugaqegtaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
umyugiighute-	evm/u74ens-	lose one's mind															to lose one's mind		< umyugaq-(ng)ighute-				umyugighute-	umyugxghute-	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
umyugiite-	evm/u7ns-	insensitive (be ~)			thoughtless (be ~)												to be insensitive; to be thoughtless		< umyugaq-(ng)ite-				umyugite-	umyugxte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Umyugsiq	Evm/[cb2	Oomyousik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices; cf. 
\f0\i0 umyugaq													Oomyousik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Umyugsiq	Umyugsiq	\uc0\u1059 \u1084 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
un\'92gapisiq	eyufgbcb2	boot for sea-hunting															sea-hunting boot		< un\'92ga(ni)-?-(u)siq		SLI JR. DICT. p. 142		un\'92gapisiq	un\'92gapisiq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1075 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
una	eyf	this one		
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  u-; 
\f2\i restricted demonstrative pronoun; see also
\f0\i0  wha- 
\f2\i under its alphabetical listing; relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 uum 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ukum \'91(of) this\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural:
\f0\i0  ukut \'91these\'92; 
\f2\i vocative:
\f0\i0  uyuq \'91you, here\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun:
\f0\i0  taana \'91that\'92; 
\f2\i plural:
\f0\i0  taakut \'91those\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  whani \'91here\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb: 
\f0\i0 whavek \'91to here\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb: 
\f0\i0 whagun \'91through here\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb:
\f0\i0  whaken \'91from here\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional:
\f0\i0  whaa \'91right here!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 tawani \'91there\'92	here (the one ~)	near (one ~ speaker)											this one; this one here; this one near the speaker		PE demonstrative uv-				una	una	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \
una-	eyf-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > unake-, unange-															PY-S una-\super 1				\nosupersub una-	una-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 -\
unaami	ey6vb	tomorrow		
\f2\i adverbial particle: 
\f0\i0 esghaghlleqamken unaami \'91I\'92ll see you tomorrow\'92; 
\f2\i can take a limited range of inflection: 
\f0\i0 Nulqaviighutkegpenaan 
\f2\i unaamilleghqaq
\f0\i0 , qayughllak 
\f2\i unaamim
\f0\i0  seghleliighi itagnaghyaghqaagut tawavek aghneghmun. \'91Don\'92t worry [today] about what will happen 
\f2\i tomorrow
\f0\i0 , because 
\f2\i tomorrow\'92s
\f0\i0  troubles are enough for that day.\'92 (Matthew 6.34)	next day												tomorrow; the next day		< unaaq-
\f2\i localis				
\f0\i0 unami	unxmi	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1084 \u1080 \
unaangu-	ey63e-	morning (be ~)		
\f2\i most often used in the subordinative with 3rd person singular object transitive ending:
\f0\i0  unaanguluku \'91when it was morning\'92; unaangupiglluku \'91when it was early morning\'92; 
\f2\i Unaanguluku
\f0\i0  aanluni, uteghnightuq ighivgaamaan. \'91After having gone out 
\f2\i when it was morning
\f0\i0 , he returned when evening had come.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 38)													to be morning		< unaaq-(ng)u-				unangu-	unxngu-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1187 \u1091 -\
unaaq	ey62	morning		
\f2\i as a particle:
\f0\i0  \'91this morning\'92; unaalqusiq \'91all morning\'92													morning		PE unnu(C)a3 (under PE unnu!)				unaq	unxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
unaaqusite-	ey62ecbns-	postpone until morning		unaaqusituq \'91he postponed acting until the next morning\'92; unaaqusitaa \'91he postponed it until the next morning\'92 /													to postpone until morning		< unaaqu-?-				unaqusite-	unxqusite-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
unaaqutaq	ey62enf2	breakfast		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 given as un\'e1quta; check				breakfast	pfdnhfr	< unaaq-qutaq		Rub. 543		unaqutaq	unxqutaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
unaaqute-	eyf2ens-	morning comes		unaaqunneghagu \'91every morning\'92													for morning to come		< unaaq-?-		CK V & E 126, CK		unaqute-	unxqute-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
unaayagh-	ey6z4-	early in the morning (go out ~)															to go out early in the morning		< unaaq-?-				unayagh-	unxyagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1103 \u1271 -\
unaayaq	ey6z2	morning flight of birds			flight of birds in the morning	birds flying in the morning											morning flight of birds						unayaq	unxyaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u257 \u1103 \u1179 \
unaghsiighwaq	eyf5c741f2	stick (wooden)															wooden stick		< unaghsiq-?-				unaghsighwaq	unaghsxghwaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
unaghsiq	eyf5cb2	wood for making something (that is, wood which is not firewood)															wood for making something (that is, wood which is not firewood)		PE una3ci3				unaghsiq	unaghsiq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
unake-	eyfrs-	catch by hunting		unakaa \'91he caught it, he hit it\'92 /	hit (with bullet, spear, etc.)												to catch by hunting; to hit (with bullet, spear, etc.)		< una-ke\super 1\nosupersub -; PY-S unak0- (under PY-S una-\super 1\nosupersub )				unake-	unake-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 -\
unakegkaq	eyfrs[rf2	caught animal															something caught		< unake-(g)kaq				unakegkaq	unakegkaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
unange-	eyf3s-	catch game (especially seal)		unanguq \'91he caught a seal\'92 /													to catch game (especially seal)		< una-nge-; PY-S una&0- (under PY-S una-\super 1\nosupersub )				unange-	unange-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 -\
unangkaq	eyf3rf2	seal that has been caught															seal that has been caught		< unange-(g)kaq				unangkaq	unangkaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
unangniigh-	eyf3y74-	hunt seals		unangniightuq \'91he is hunting (seals)\'92 / Taagken 
\f2\i unangniighet
\f0\i0  naapsimaat l\'e6v, naapluku petugaat tapghaghpagneng uqvigmun. \'91Then some 
\f2\i hunters
\f0\i0  caught the lion (l\'e6v), and when they caught him, they tied him up with a strong rope to a tree.\'92 (YUP. ULUNG. 2:123)	hunt												to hunt; to hunt seals		< unange-niigh-				unangnigh-	unangnxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
unangniighta	eyf3y75nf	hunter															hunter		< unangniigh-(s)ta				unangnighta	unangnxghta	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1085 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
unangniighusiq	eyf3y74ecb2	weapon for hunting seals															weapon for hunting seals		< unangniigh-(u)siq				unangnighusiq	unangnxghusiq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
unangsagh-	eyf3cz4-	catch lots of seals															to catch lots of seals		< unange-?-				unangsagh-	unangsagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
unangseghwaaghun	eyf3cs4164ey	gun or other device for catching game		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 gun or other device for catching game		< unange-?-(ghw/ngw/w)aagh\super 1\nosupersub -(u)n		CK Rub 544		unangseghwaghun	unangseghwxghun	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1187 \u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
unatagh-	eyfnf4-	pick greens		unataghtuq \'91he picked greens\'92; unataghii \'91he picked them\'92 /	greens (pick ~)												to pick greens		PY unata3-				unatagh-	unatagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
unataghyaghqaq	eyfnf4mz52f2	plant, wild edible															wild edible plant		< unatagh-yaghkaq				unataghyaghqaq	unataghyaghqaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
unataq	eyfnf2	alaska carrot			
\f2\i Hedysarum hedysaroides	Geum Rossii											
\f0\i0 alaska carrot 
\f2\i (Hedysarum hedysaroides or Geum Rossii)				
\f0\i0 from Aynganga\'92s article in \'93Beringia\'94		unataq	unataq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
unaymigh-	eyfqvb4-	capable (feel ~ of acting)		unaymightuq \'91he feels capable\'92; unaymighaa \'91he feels he can act on it\'92 /													to feel capable of acting		PE una9mi-				unaymigh-	unaymigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1072 \u1253 \u1084 \u1080 \u1271 -\
uneghmig-	eys4vbu-	put under one\'92s arm		uneghmigaa \'91he has it clutched under his arm\'92 /	carry or clutch under one\'92s arm												to put under one's arm; to carry or clutch under one's arm		< unegh-mig-				uneghmig-	uneghmig-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\
uneghrugtaq	eys4he[nf2	bag or purse with shoulder strap which is carried hanging down under one's arm			amulet worn over the shoulder												bag or purse with shoulder strap which is carried hanging down under one's arm; amulet worn over the shoulder		< unegh-ruk-taq\super 1		\nosupersub gloss 2 CK Rub 548		uneghrugtaq	uneghrugtaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
unegna	eysuyf	down there (one ~)		
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  un'g-; 
\f2\i extended demonstrative pronoun;
\f0\i0  
\f2\i relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 un'gum \'91(of) the one down there\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 unegkut \'91those down there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative:
\f0\i0  unegyuq \'91you, down there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun:
\f0\i0  taanegna \'91that one down there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  un'gani \'91down there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb: 
\f0\i0 un'gavek \'91to down there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb:
\f0\i0  uun'ggun \'91through down there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb: 
\f0\i0 unegken \'91from down there\'92;
\f2\i  interjectional: 
\f0\i0 un'ga \'91there (down there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb:
\f0\i0  taan'gani \'91there, down there\'92	out on the sea (one ~)												that one down there; that one out on the sea		PE demonstrative un!-				unegna	unegna	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
unegte-	eys[ns-	stay behind		unegtuq \'91he stayed behind\'92, \'91he was left behind\'92; unegtaa \'91he left it or her behind\'92 / unegtaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  unegtekaq \'91something left behind\'92	leave or be left behind	behind (stay or keep ~)											to stay behind; to leave or be left behind		PE un0!-				unegte-	unegte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
unegtuusaq	eys[n8cz2	left (something ~ for others)		= uun\'92gutaq													something left for others		< unegte-ugh-(u)saq				unegtusaq	unegtxsaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
unegyuuq	eysum02	shellfish, clam-type		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 clam-type shellfish						unegyuq	unegyxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1075 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1179 \
uneq	eys2	armpit			underarm	area between arm and body											armpit; underarm; area between arm and body		PE un03-				uneq	uneq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
ungagaq	e3fuf2	lichen			reindeer moss	moss (reindeer ~)											lichen; reindeer moss		PY u&a!$aq (under PY u&ak); < ungak-ghaq				ungagaq	ungagaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
ungagigh-	e3fub4-	shave															to shave		< ungak-(ng)igh-				ungagigh-	ungagigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ungak	e3fr	whisker			beard hair	mustache hair											whisker; beard hair; mustache hair		PY u&ak				ungak	ungak	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1082 \
ungasqi-	e3fc2b-	capricious without enjoyment (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R,V&E)													
\f0\i0 to be capricious without enjoyment	rfghbpybxfnm			CK V & E 173; Rub 548		ungasqi-	ungasqi-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 -\
ungavik	e3fdbr	enclosure, small square and tent-like, inside the traditional dome-shaped house, used for sleeping		
\f2\i Ungaviguut
\f0\i0  amit ighivganghani nekeglluki qavaatkayugni, nanilighluki. \'91
\f2\i There were small square tent-like enclosures
\f0\i0  that could be closed off  that they set up in the evening where they could sleep, and they provided them with lamps.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:82) 													small square tent-like sleeping enclosure inside the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.)		< u&an				ungavik	ungavik	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
ungavisqwaaq	e3fdbc2162	snowflake															snowflake		< ungavik-squq-?		SLI Cur. Man. 22		ungavisqwaq	ungavisqwxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1072 \u1074 \u1080 \u1089 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
Ungazighmii(t)	E3fpb4v7\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)			people from Ungaziq												a particular clan; people from Ungaziq		< Ungaziq-mii			xxxt	Ungazighmi(t)	Ungazighmx(t)	\u1059 \u1187 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 \u1084 \u1251 (\u1090 )\
Ungaziq	E3fpb2	Chaplino (specifically Old Chaplino) in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 2 in Appendices; the name 
\f0\i0 Ungaziq
\f2\i  specifically refers to Old Chaplino at Cape Chaplina, but is now also the Yupik name for New Chaplino inside Tkachen Bay which was originally called 
\f0\i0 Tasiq
\f2\i , apparently because the population and administrative apparatus ot Old Chaplino has been moved there; sometimes  this word is used for Yupik-inhabited Chukotka in general	
\f0\i0 Indian Point in Chukotka	Old Chaplino in Chukotka								Chukotka (in general)			Chaplino (specifically Old Chaplino) in Chukotka; Indian Point; Chukotka or Siberia in general						Ungaziq	Ungaziq	\uc0\u1059 \u1187 \u1072 \u1079 \u1080 \u1179 \
ungelegte-	e3sks[ns-	shake		ungelegtuq \'91he is shaking\'92 / ungelegtestaa \'91it made him to shake\'92	tremble												to shake; to tremble		PE u&ul0!-				ungelegte-	ungelegte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ungigh-	e3b4-	soften		
\f2\i Chukotan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 to soften	hfpvzuxfncz			CK V & E 179		ungigh-	ungigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
ungiighte-	e375ns-	whiskers (become covered with ~)															to become covered with whiskers		< ungak-?-				ungighte-	ungxghte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ungilag-	e3bkzu-	itch		ungilagtuq \'91it itches\'92 /													to itch		PE u&ila!-				ungilag-	ungilag-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 -\
ungilagnaq	e3bkzuyf2	itching (something that causes ~)															something that causes itching		< ungilag-naq				ungilagnaq	ungilagnaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
ungilagsaghagh-	e3bkz[cz4f4-	itch (cause to ~)		ungilagsaghaghaa \'91it is making him itch\'92 /													to cause to itch		< ungilag-saghagh-				ungilagsaghagh-	ungilagsaghagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ungilagyaq	e3bkzumz2	sea sponge		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined	
\f0\i0 sponge (sea ~)												sea sponge		< ungilag-?-				ungilagyaq	ungilagyaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
ungipaate-	e3bg6ns-	tell		ungipaataa \'91he told him\'92 / ungipaataanga kaalleqniluki unaami \'91he told me that they would come tomorrow\'92													to tell		< ungipagh-(u)te-				ungipate-	ungipxte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ungipagh-	e3bgf4-	news (spread ~)			inform												to spread news; to inform						ungipagh-	ungipagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ungipaghaan	e3bgf46n	story		
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  ungipaghaata; 
\f2\i often with animal or mythological characters;
\f0\i0  Ayumiim 
\f2\i Ungipaghaatangi
\f0\i0  \'91
\f2\i Tales
\f0\i0  of Long Ago\'92 
\f2\i (title of a certain series of books, 
\f0\i0 Kaneshiro 1972, 1975a, 1975b, 1975c
\f2\i )	
\f0\i0 traditional story	tale								legend			traditional story; tale; legend		< ungipaghagh-(u)n				ungipaghan	ungipaghxn	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u257 \u1090 \
ungipaghagh-	e3bgf4f4-	tell a traditional story		ungipaghaghtuq \'91he is telling a traditional story\'92 / ungipaghaatii \'91he is telling them a traditional story\'92; Ungipaghaghlanga \'91Let Me Tell a Story\'92 
\f2\i (title of a certain book, 
\f0\i0 Koonooka 2003)													to tell a traditional story		PE univka3a3				ungipaghagh-	ungipaghagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
ungipaghaq	e3bgf4f2	story (traditional)			tale	legend											story (traditional); tale; legend		PE univka3a3; < ungipagh-aq				ungipaghaq	ungipaghaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
ungipaghqe-	e3bgf52s-	unfortunate event occurs		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)									
\f0\i0 is English gloss ok?				for an unfortunate event to occur	ghjbc[jlbn ytcxfcn]t			CK V & E 180		ungipaghqe-	ungipaghqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
ungipaghsugh-	e3bgf5c/4-	ask for news or other information															to ask for news or other information		< ungipaq-sugh-				ungipaghsugh-	ungipaghsugh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\
ungipamsug-	e3bgfvc/u-	relate			tell												to relate; to tell		< ungipagh-msug-				ungipamsug-	ungipamsug-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
ungipamsuk	e3bgfvc/r	narrative			account	history											narrative; account; history		< ungipagh-msug-				ungipamsuk	ungipamsuk	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
ungipange-	e3bgf3s-	hear news															to hear news		< ungipaq-nge-				ungipange-	ungipange-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 -\
ungipaq	e3bgf2	news			information												news; information						ungipaq	ungipaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \
ungipaqfigite- 	e3bgf2abufns-	discuss (be something that one cannot ~)															to be something that one cannot discuss		< ungipaq-ke\super 2\nosupersub -vik-(ng)ite-				ungipaqfigite- 	ungipaqfigite- 	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1179 \u1092 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
ungipite-	e3bgbns-	tell		ungipitaa \'91he told him\'92 /													to tell		 < ungipaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -(u)te-				ungipite-	ungipite-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1087 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
Ungiramket	E3bhfvrsn	former village between Cape Chaplina and Cape Mertensa in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 former village between Cape Chaplina and Cape Mertensa in Chukotka		< ?-ramka\super e\nosupersub -
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Ungiramket	Ungiramket	\uc0\u1059 \u1187 \u1080 \u1088 \u1072 \u1084 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \
unglegh-	e3ks4-	nestle down in a ball (of dogs, wolves, etc.)		ungleghtuq \'91it nestled down\'92; kaviighem ungleghallgha \'91place where a fox bedded down\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  unglun	bed down (of an animal)												to nestle down in a ball (of dogs, wolves, etc.); to bed down (of an animal)						unglegh-	unglegh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
ungllaghutaq	e3k]z4enf2	trimming on hood, hat or sleeve		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 trimming on hood, hat or sleeve				CK Rub 550		ungllaghutaq	ungllaghutaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
unglleg-	e3k]su-	gather or draw together with folds or pleats		ungllegtuq \'91he or it got wrinkled\'92 / ungllegtaa \'91he wrinkled it, gathered it (cloth), etc.\'92	wrinkle with age	withdraw from activity								shrink			to gather or draw together with folds or pleats; to wrinkle with age; to withdraw from activity; to shrink						unglleg-	unglleg-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 -\
ungllevregagh-	e3k]sdhsuf4-	wrinkle			curl												to wrinkle; to curl		< unglleg-vlegagh-				ungllevregagh-	ungllevregagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1074 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
unglun	e3k/y	nest of bird		unglutnga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  unglutanga \'91its nest\'92													nest of bird		PE u&lu				unglun	unglun	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1083 \u1102 \u1085 \
ungughte-	e3e5ns-	take back		ungughtaa \'91he took her back\'92, \'91he pulled it back\'92	pull back												to take back; to pull back		PE u&u3-				ungughte-	ungughte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
unguva-	e3edf-	alive (be ~)		unguvaaq \'91it is alive\'92 /													to be alive		PE u&uma-				unguva-	unguva-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 -\
unguvagh-	e3edf4-	come to life		unguvaghtuq \'91it came to life, revived\'92 / unguvaghtaa \'91he revived it\'92	revive												to come to life		< unguva-?-				unguvagh-	unguvagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
unguvalleq	e3edfk]s2	life															life		< unguva-lleq				unguvalleq	unguvalleq	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
unguvayute-, unguvavyiigh-	e3edf/ns-. e3edfdq74-	alive (be barely ~)															to be barely alive		< unguva-?-				unguvayute-, unguvavyigh-	unguvayute-, unguvavyxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1102 \u1090 \u1099 -, \u1091 \u1187 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1074 \u1253 \u1251 \u1271 -\
Unguvigaq	E3edbuf2	Ongoveyuk River and Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Ongoveyuk River and Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.						Unguvigaq	Unguvigaq	\uc0\u1059 \u1187 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
ungyaq	e3mz2	fluff, thin, on body		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 underhair												thin fluff on body; underhair				CK Rub 551		ungyaq	ungyaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
ungyugte-	e3m/[ns-	drive game in order to hunt it		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to drive game in order to hunt it						ungyugte-	ungyugte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1187 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uniigh-	ey74-	limp (become ~)		uniightuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uniighaa \'91he lost muscle control\'92 / uniighumaaq \'91he is paralyzed\'92	lose muscle control	paralyzed (become ~)											to become limp; to lose muscle control; to become paralyzed		PE una(C)i3-				unigh-	unxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
uniighyug-	ey74m/u-	hurt (feel ~ emotionally)			offended (feel ~)												to feel hurt emotionally; to feel offended		< uniigh-yug-				unighyug-	unxghyug-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
uniilliighaghte-	ey7k]74f5ns-	soften			pliable (make ~)												to soften; to make pliable		< uniigh-?-				unillighaghte-	unxllxghaghte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uniistaaghhaq*	ey7cn65f2	soft thing		uniistaaghhaaguq \'91it is soft\'92													soft thing	vzurbq. ub,rbq. njyrbq	< uniigh-staaghhaq		CK V & E 130 (Russ voc)		unistaghhaq*	unxstxghhaq*	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
unite-	eybns-	leave behind		unitaa \'91he left it behind\'92 / unitiiq \'91he left something behind\'92													to leave behind		PE unit-				unite-	unite-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
unkusae	eyreczs	trap, steel, for animals		
\f2\i also dual,
\f0\i0  unkusek, 
\f2\i for one trap;
\f0\i0  = utkusa	braining trap activated by twisted sinew cord under tension												steel trap for animals; braining trap activated by twisted sinew cord under tension		from Chukchi utkuc\'920n \'91trap\'92	14		unkuseke-, unkuselighi-, unkuseniigh-, unkusequ-	unkusae	unkusae	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1099 \
unkuseke-	eyrecsrs-	catch with trap		unkesekaa \'91he trapped it\'92 /	trap (it)												to catch with trap; to trap (it)		< unkusa-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				unkuseke-	unkuseke-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 -\
unkuselighi-	eyrecskb4b-	set traps		unkuselighiiq \'91he is setting traps\'92 /													to set traps		 < unkusa-ligh-i\super 1\nosupersub -				unkuselighi-	unkuselighi-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1099 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 -\
unkuseniigh-	eyrecsy74-	trap (go trapping)															to go trapping		< unkusa\super e\nosupersub -niigh-				unkusenigh-	unkusenxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1099 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
unkusequ-	eyrecs2e-	check traps															to check traps		< unkusa\super e\nosupersub -qu-				unkusequ-	unkusequ-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 -\
unkuvagaghaq	eyredfuf4f2	rope, long and thick, made from skin of young walrus		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 long thick rope made from skin of young walrus	lkbyysq njkcnsq htvtym bp irehs vjkjljuj vjh;f			Rub. 546		unkuvagaghaq	unkuvagaghaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
unkuvak	eyredfr	walrus yearling		unkuvalek \'91walrus cow with yearling\'92													yearling walrus						unkuvak	unkuvak	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
Unlluk	Eyk]/r	Nayvak (site located to the west of ~ the lagoon with old Chaplino at its eastern corner) in Chukotka)		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site located to the west of Lake Nayvak (the lagoon with old Chaplino at its eastern corner) in Chukotka				CK		Unlluk	Unlluk	\uc0\u1059 \u1085 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
unug-	eyeu-	night comes		unugtuq \'91it became night, night fell\'92; unugaa \'91night came upon him\'92 / ununeghsighaqa \'91I'm waiting for night\'92; tawantuq unugtaallghanun kenlanga \'91he stayed there until very late at night\'92													for it to become night		PE unnu!				unug-	unug-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1075 -\
unugaghllag-	eyeuf5k]zu-	early (act or occur early in the ~)															to act or occur very early in the morning				Akiingqwaghneghet 110		unugaghllag-	unugaghllag-	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 -\
unuggiinaq	eye[7yf2	night (a single ~)															a single night		< unuk-ghhaq-(ng)inaq				unugginaq	unuggxnaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1093 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
unuk	eyer	night		unuwaa? \'91is it night?\'92; unuk 
\f2\i as a particle: 
\f0\i0 \'91last night\'92	last night												night; last night		PE unnu!				unuk	unuk	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \
unukun	eyerey	tonight		
\f2\i adverbial particle													
\f0\i0 tonight; when night comes; during the coming night		< unuk-vialis				unukun	unukun	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
unungllaan, unugnaan, unugsaan	eye3k]9y. eyeuy6y. eye[c9y	gnat			midge												gnat; midge		< unuk-ngllagh-(u)n (?), unuk-?-(u)n, unuk-?-(u)n				unungllan, unugnan, unugsan	unungllxn, unugnxn, unugsxn	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 , \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u257 \u1085 , \u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1085 \
unusengetaq	eyecs3snf2	twilight			night (short spring or summer ~)												twilight; short spring or summer night		< unuk-?-				unusengetaq	unusengetaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1085 \u1091 \u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
upag-	egfu-	go down to boat or out to ship to see or help those arriving		upagtuq \'91he went down to a boat\'92; upagaa \'91he went down to help her\'92 /													to go down to boat or out to ship to see or help those arriving		PE upa!-				upag-	upag-	\uc0\u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
upelen	egsksy	deliberately		
\f2\i Chukotkan; particle	
\f0\i0 this way	purposely											deliberately; this way; not the other way; purposely		from Chukchi up0l\'920n \'91motivated, driven by something\'92				upelen	upelen	\uc0\u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1085 \
upenghaghaq*	egsy4f4f2	spring, early															early spring		< upenghaq-ghaq				upenghaghaq*	upenghaghaq*	\uc0\u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
upenghaq	egsy4f2	spring (season)		
\f2\i as a particle,
\f0\i0  \'91last spring\'92	last spring												spring (season); last spring		PE up0n(0)3a3				upenghaq	upenghaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
upenghaqun, upenghaqu	egsy4f2ey. egsy4f2e	spring (next ~)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 next spring		< upenghaq-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 upenghaqun, upenghaqu	upenghaqun, upenghaqu	\uc0\u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 , \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \
upenghiighte-	egsy475ns-	spring (do something, or to stay, all through the ~)															to do something, or to stay, all through the spring		< upenghaq-?-				upenghighte-	upenghxghte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
upleg-	egk]su-	rush over to		uplegtuq (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uplegiiq) \'91he rushed over to someone or something\'92; uplegaa \'91he rushed over to it or her\'92 /													to rush over to						upleg-	upleg-	\uc0\u1091 \u1087 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 -\
upugh-	ege4-	startled (get ~)		upughtuq \'91he got startled\'92 / upughtaa \'91he startled him\'92; upuutkaa \'91he got startled by it\'92; 
\f2\i Upughpenanga
\f0\i0  pugimameng aghvightunga inglunganun. \'91Without 
\f2\i quavering
\f0\i0  I crossed over swimming to the other side of it.\'92 (AANGHHAQ 39)	quaver												to get startled; to quaver		PE up0t-				upugh-	upugh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 -\
upugha-	ege4f-	hospitable (be ~)		upughaaq \'91he is hospitable\'92 / upughataa \'91he is being hospitable to her\'92; upughaneq \'91a hospitable person\'92; upughanghilnguq \'91an inhospitable person\'92													to be hospitable		PY-S upu3a- (under PE up0t-)				upugha-	upugha-	\uc0\u1091 \u1087 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 -\
upupeng	egegs3	might as well		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 meghnughllaguunga, upupeng wiin taaqaghhnaqunga qepghaneghmeng \'91I'm very tired, I might as well quit for a while\'92; Maantekumtung tuqulleqiinkung. 
\f2\i Upupeng
\f0\i0  qayangllaghlutung aghulaqeltung. \'91If we stay here, they will kill us, we 
\f2\i might as well
\f0\i0  make a kayak and leave.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 35)													might as well		from Chukchi opop0& \'91let\'92s\'92				upupeng	upupeng	\uc0\u1091 \u1087 \u1091 \u1087 \u1099 \u1187 \
Uqaghlliit	E2f5k]7n	Sireniki people		
\f2\i this is a plural; 
\f0\i0 Uqaghllistun \'91in the language of the people of Sireniki\'92; = Uqeghlliit; 
\f2\i see also 
\f0\i0 Sighinek													the people of Sireniki in Chukotka						Uqaghllit	Uqaghllxt	\uc0\u1059 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1090 \
uqalitaq	e2fkbnf2	swing, hanging		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E); used in the plural,
\f0\i0  uqalitat, 
\f2\i for one such swing													
\f0\i0 hanging swing	gjldtcyst rfxtkb			CK V & E 99		uqalitaq	uqalitaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
Uqeghlliit	E2s5k]7n	Sireniki people		
\f2\i this is a plural; 
\f0\i0 Uqeghllistun \'91in the language of the people of Sireniki\'92; = Uqaghlliit; 
\f2\i see also 
\f0\i0 Sighinek													the people of Sireniki in Chukotka						Uqeghllit	Uqeghllxt	\uc0\u1059 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1090 \
uqenge-	e2s3s-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > uqengeghte-, uqengeghyuugte-, uqengelli-, uqengelliqe-; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  uqik																			uqenge-	uqenge-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 -\
uqengeghte-	e2s3s5ns-	lighter in weight (be ~)		uqengeghtuq \'91it got lighter, he feels better, the weather improved\'92; uqengeghtaa \'91he made it tidier\'92 /	better (feel ~ after sickness)	weather improves								tidy (it) up			to be lighter in weight; to feel better after sickness; for weather to improve		< uqenge-?-				uqengeghte-	uqengeghte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uqengeghyuugte-	e2s3s4m0[ns-	feel much better															to feel much better		< uqenge-?-				uqengeghyugte-	uqengeghyxgte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uqengelli-	e2s3sk]b-	lighter (become or make ~ in weight)															to become or make lighter in weight		< uqenge-(gh/li)i-				uqengelli-	uqengelli-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
uqengelliqe-	e2s3sk]b2s-	free and easy (feel ~)															to feel free and easy		< uqenge-?-				uqengelliqe-	uqengelliqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
uqengestaaghhaq*	e2s3scn65f2	lightweight thing		uqengestaaghhaaguq \'91it is light in weight\'92													lightweight thing	kturbq	< uqengeghte-staaghhaq		CK V & E 130  (Russ voc)		uqengestaghhaq*	uqengestxghhaq*	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
uqengestaaq	e2s3scn62	lightweight thing		uqengestaaghhaaguq \'91it is light in weight\'92													lightweight thing	kturbq	< uqengeghtestaaq		CK V & E 130  (Russ voc)		uqengestaq	uqengestxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
uqeq	e2s2	lee side		uuqghani \'91on its lee side\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  uughqa	south side												lee side; south side		PE uq03				uqeq	uqeq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1179 \
uqfigaq	e2abuf2	willow (diamond ~)			
\f2\i Salix pulchra	
\f0\i0 roots, edible, of diamond willow											edible roots of diamond willow 
\f2\i (Salix pulchra) 
\f0\i0 or the willow shrub itself		< uqvik-ghaq				uqfigaq	uqfigaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1092 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
uqfik	e2abr	tree															tree		PE uqvi!				uqfik	uqfik	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1092 \u1080 \u1082 \
uqfillegaq	e2abk]suf2	shrub			bush												shrub; bush		< uqfik-?-				uqfillegaq	uqfillegaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1092 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
uqfillgaaq	e2abk][62	twig(s)															twig(s)		< uqfik-?-				uqfillgaq	uqfillgxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1092 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u257 \u1179 \
uqigh-	e2b4-	put oil in (it)		uqightuq \'91he got (lots of) oil\'92; uqighaa \'91he put oil in it\'92 /  Waranwha  avaqutaghhaghten neghellequt, ama 
\f2\i uqighllequkut
\f0\i0 . \'91At least your little children will eat and we\'92ll 
\f2\i get
\f0\i0  lots of 
\f2\i oil
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 25)	get (lots of) oil												to put oil in (it); get (lots of) oil		< uquq-ligh-				uqigh-	uqigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1271 -\
uqigite-	e2bubns-	light in weight (be ~)		uqigituq \'91it is light\'92 /													to be light in weight		< uqik-(ng)ite-				uqigite-	uqigite-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uqigkutaq	e2b[renf2	weight (heavy object)			ballast												weight (heavy object); ballast	nz;tksq	< uqik-qutaq		CK V & E 130 (Russ Voc)		uqigkutaq	uqigkutaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uqigtu-	e2b[ne-	heavy (be ~)		uqigtuuq \'91it is heavy\'92 /													to be heavy		< uqik-tu-				uqigtu-	uqigtu-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 -\
uqigtughte-	e2b[ne5ns-	weight (increase in ~)			increase in weight	heavier (become ~)											to increase in weight; to become heavier		< uqigtu-ghte-				uqigtughte-	uqigtughte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uqigtutala	e2b[nenfkz	weight (of something)		uqigtutalanga \'91its weight\'92													weight (of something		< uqigtu-tala				uqigtutala	uqigtutala	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
uqiigh-	e274-	remove oil or blubber		uqiighaa neghsaq \'91he took the blubber off the seal\'92													to remove oil or blubber		< uquq-(ng)igh-				uqigh-	uqxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1251 \u1271 -\
uqiineq	e27ys2	lee side			windless area												lee side; windless area		< uqiite-neq\super 2				\nosupersub uqineq	uqxneq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
uqiiq	e272	leeward direction		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 leeward direction				CK Rub 535		uqiq	uqxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1251 \u1179 \
uqiitagh-	e27nf4-	stay out of wind															to stay out of the wind		< uqiite-?-				uqitagh-	uqxtagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uqiite-	e27ns-	shelter (take ~ from the wind)		uqiituq \'91he took shelter \'91/ uqiitfikaa \'91he took shelter in it\'92													to take shelter from the wind		PE uqqit- (under PE uq03)				uqite-	uqxte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uqik	e2br	weight (as an abstract quality)															weight (as an abstract quality)		cf. PE uqi&it-				uqik	uqik	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \
Uqikak	E2brfr	Okikak Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Okikak Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.						Uqikak	Uqikak	\uc0\u1059 \u1179 \u1080 \u1082 \u1072 \u1082 \
uqingllagh-	e2b3k]z4-	make oil from blubber															to make oil from blubber		< uquq-?-ngllagh-				uqingllagh-	uqingllagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
uqligh-	e2k]b4-	watch for game (or for a person)		uqlightuq \'91he is watching for game\'92 /													to watch for game (or for a person)		PE uqli3-				uqligh-	uqligh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 -\
uqliite-	e2k]7ns-	aim at		uqliitaa \'91he is aiming at it\'92 /	threaten												to aim at; to threaten 		< uqligh-(u)te-		CK V & E 166, Rub 53 gloss 2		uqlite-	uqlxte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uqlughneq	e2k]e4ys2	drop of liquid															drop of liquid				CK Rub 536 CK		uqlughneq	uqlughneq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
uqlughqagh-	e2k]/52f4-	drip (keep dripping)															to keep dripping		< uqlughte-?-				uqlughqagh-	uqlughqagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uqlughseketaq	e2k]/5csrsnf2	drip catcher															drip catcher		< uqlughte-?-				uqlughseketaq	uqlughseketaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1089 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uqlughte-	e2k]/5ns-	drip		uqlughtuq \'91it is dripping\'92; uqlughtaa \'91it is dripping on it\'92 /													to drip		PE qu3lu3-				uqlughte-	uqlughte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uqlumrek	e2k]/vhsr	oyster		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 oyster						uqlumrek	uqlumrek	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1084 \u1088 \u1099 \u1082 \
uqug-, uqugte-	e2eu-. e2e[ns-	moldy (get ~)		uqugtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uqugaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uqugtaa \'91it got moldy\'92 /													to get moldy		PE uqu!				uqug-, uqugte-	uqug-, uqugte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1075 -, \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uqughate-	e2e4fns-	taste oily or greasy		uqughalnguq \'91oily food\'92													to taste oily or greasy		<  uquq-?-				uqughate-	uqughate-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uqughqaq	e2e52f2	lamp oil			fuel oil												lamp oil; fuel oil				< uquq-kaq		uqughqaq	uqughqaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
uqughqu	e2e52e	oily or inner side of a dried walrus skin		uqughqunga tanpeghhem taakluku kinengllaghaquq \'91the oily (inner) part of the walrus skin will (put up to) be dried longer\'92													oily or inner side of a dried walrus skin		< uquq-?				uqughqu	uqughqu	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \
uqughte-	e2e5ns-	apply oil to			add oil to	dish (make a ~  of berries, reindeer fat, water and sugar)											to apply oil to; to add oil to; to make a dish of berries, reindeer fat, water and sugar		< uquq-?-				uqughte-	uqughte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uqughtekaq	e2e5nsrf2	dish of salmonberries, seal oil, shortening or lard, and sugar; Eskimo 			Eskimo \'93ice cream\'94												dish of salmonberries, seal oil, shortening or lard, and sugar; Eskimo \'93ice cream\'94		< uqughte-(g)kaq		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 73		uqughtekaq	uqughtekaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
uqugpagnite-	e2e[gfuybns-	smell moldy		uqugpagnituq \'91it smells moldy\'92 /													to smell moldy		< uquk-pagnite-				uqugpagnite-	uqugpagnite-	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uquk	e2er	mold															mold		PE uqu!				uquk	uquk	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \
uqulghutaq	e2ek4enf2	tank for gasoline or oil		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  uqulghutak, 
\f2\i for one gas tank													
\f0\i0 tank for gasoline or oil		< uquq-lghutaq				uqulghutaq	uqulghutaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uqumigta	e2evb[nf	flock of birds heading south in evening															flock of birds heading south in evening				pg. 134 of Lore vol. 1		uqumigta	uqumigta	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \
uqumraak	e2evh6r	fat, little bit															little bit of fat		< uquq-?-				uqumrak	uqumrxk	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
uqumyak	e2evmzr	pitch (tree ~)															tree pitch		PE uq9umya! (under uq9u!); < uquq-?-				uqumyak	uqumyak	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
uquq	e2e2	blubber		uqaa \'91its oil\'92; Sivuyagtenginaat gaaqayuguftut aghveghem 
\f2\i uqaaneng
\f0\i0 . \'91The strikers were the only ones who rendered the whale 
\f2\i blubber
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:122); Nayugluki, amiirii yugusiineng iiknemteki uusluki 
\f2\i uqiighaqaput
\f0\i0 .\'92After we skin them (the seals) without splitting the skin, remove the skins from the carcasses and turn them inside out, we remove the 
\f2\i fat
\f0\i0  from them.\'92 (MRS. DELLA W. 34)	oil	fat								seal oil			blubber; oil; seal oil; fat		PE uq9u3				uquq	uquq	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
uquughralek	e284hfksr	inner (one with ~ side (of hide))		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); exact meaning undetermined													
\f0\i0 one with inner side (of hide)	c vtplhj/	< uquq-?-lek ?		Rub. 536		uqughralek	uqxghralek	\uc0\u1091 \u1179 \u1263 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
Uquuk	E28r	Okok R. and its mouth on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Okok R. and its mouth on St. Lawrence Is.						Uquk	Uqxk	\uc0\u1059 \u1179 \u1263 \u1082 \
uraka	ehfrf	transverse pieces on sled, support for runner		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 transverse pieces on the sled, support for runner		from Chukchi ureek0t \'91?\'92	x	CK Rub 552		uraka	uraka	\uc0\u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1072 \
uramra 	ehfvhf	awake (while ~)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  qavaalungallu esghaamazikun nalighmeng uramra \'91did I see it in my sleep or was it real\'92													while awake		from Chukchi \'91ora \'91openly\'92 (?)				uramra 	uramra 	\uc0\u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1084 \u1088 \u1072 \
urang	ehf3	very much		
\f2\i adverbial particle													
\f0\i0 very much		from Chukchi \'91ora& \'91openly\'92				urang	urang	\uc0\u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1187 \
uremte-	ehsvns-	joke		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  uremtaa \'91he is kidding him\'92 / = waamte-	kid	tease											to joke; to kid; to tease		PE u9a(t)- and u9am0(t)-				uremte-	uremte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1088 \u1099 \u1084 \u1090 \u1099 -\
usi	ecb	load		usinga \'91its load\'92													load		PE uci\super 1				\nosupersub usi	usi	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \
usiista	ec7cnf	freighter (ship)															freighter (ship)		< usi-?-(s)ta				usista	usxsta	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
usiligh-	ecbkb4-	load		usilighaa \'91he loaded it\'92													to load		< usi-ligh-				usiligh-	usiligh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
usingigh-	ecb3b4-	unload		usingighaa \'91he unloaded it\'92													to unload		< usi-(ng)igh-				usingigh-	usingigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
uskaaq	ecr62	cord used with seal retrieving hook or of a sling															cord used with seal retrieving hook; cord of a sling		PE uyukku3(a3)				uskaq	uskxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1082 \u257 \u1179 \
uskughapik	ecre4fgbr	twine used for summer sculpin fishing															twine used for summer sculpin fishing		< uskughaq-pik				uskughapik	uskughapik	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
uskughaq	ecre4f2	fishing line			cord	twine											fishing line; cord; twine		PE uyukku3(a3)				uskughaq	uskughaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
uskungnaqun	ecre3yfney	incantation for safety when hunting by boat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 incantation for safety when hunting by boat				CK Rub 553		uskungnaqun	uskungnaqun	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1082 \u1091 \u1187 \u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
uspeqe-	ecgs2s-	estimate		uspeqaa \'91he estimated its size, weight, etc.\'92 / uspequtuq \'91he made an estimate\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 usputagh-													to estimate		PE usp03- (under PE u90!-)				uspeqe-	uspeqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
uspequte-	ecgs2ens-	show how		uspequtaa \'91he showed him how\'92 /													to show how		< uspeqe-(u)te-				uspequte-	uspequte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1087 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uspusiqe-	ecgecb2s-	adapt to		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to adapt to				CK Rub 554		uspusiqe-	uspusiqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1087 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
usputagh-	ecgenf4-	measure		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  uspeqe-; Nanuum amiraan angtalanga 
\f2\i usputaghaqa
\f0\i0 . \'91I 
\f2\i measured
\f0\i0  the size of the polar bear skin.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 28)													to measure						usputagh-	usputagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
usputaq	ecgenf2	ruler (measuring device)															ruler (measuring device)						usputaq	usputaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uspute-	ecgens-	measure		usputuq \'91he measured himself\'92; usputaa \'91he measured it\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 uspeqe-	compare												to measure; to compare						uspute-	uspute-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1087 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
usugh-	ec/4-			
\f2\i (root) 
\f0\i0 > usuqe-, usughyug-																			usugh-	usugh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\
usughyug-	ec/4/u-	impressed (be ~)		usughyugtuq \'91he is impressed\'92 / = usuqsug-; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  usuqe-													to be impressed						usughyug-	usughyug-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1102 \u1075 -\
usugtaq	ec/[nf2	tenon of skin boat frame member or sled frame member															tenon of skin boat frame member or sled frame member		< usuk-taq\super 1				\nosupersub usugtaq	usugtaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
usuk	ec/r	penis		
\f2\i nowadays only animal penis; see 
\f0\i0 uupa 
\f2\i for human penis													
\f0\i0 penis		PE ucu!				usuk	usuk	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1082 \
usuqe-	ec/2s-	praise		usuquq \'91he praised himself to others\'92; usuqaa \'91he praised her\'92 / 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 usughyug-													to praise		PE ucu3-				usuqe-	usuqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 -\
usuqesage-	ec/2sczus-	ostentatious (be ~)			showy (be ~)												to be ostentatious; to be showy		< usuqe-?-				usuqesage-	usuqesage-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1099 -\
usuqnagh- 	ec/2y]f4-	impressive (be ~)															to be impressive		< usuqe-nagh-				usuqnagh- 	usuqnagh- 	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
usuqsug-	ec/2c/u-	impressed (be ~)		usuqsugtuq \'91he is impressed\'92 / = usughyug-													to be impressed		< usuqe-yug-				usuqsug-	usuqsug-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
usuqsuke-	ec/2c/2s-	impressed (be ~ with)		usuqsukaa \'91he is impressed with him\'92 / 													to be impressed with		< usuqe-yug-ke\super 2\nosupersub -				usuqsuke-	usuqsuke-	\uc0\u1091 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1089 \u1102 \u1179 \u1099 -\
utaqa-	enf2f-	wait for		utaqaa \'91he is waiting for her\'92 / utaqiiguq \'91he is waiting\'92; utaqalleqamken \'91I shall wait for you\'92; utaqanga \'91wait for me\'92													to wait for		PE utaq0-				utaqa-	utaqa-	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 -\
utaqalgigh-	enf2fkub4-	wait (for)		Legan ulmighulluku ughluveni 
\f2\i utaqalgighaa
\f0\i0  mekelghiighem. \'91The boy just drew back his bow and 
\f2\i waited for it
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SULUWET 101)													to wait (for)		< utaqa-?-				utaqalgigh-	utaqalgigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
uteghmigagh-	ens4vbuf4-	multiply (mathematically)		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to multiply (mathematically)						uteghmigagh-	uteghmigagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uteghmun	ens4vey	homeward		
\f2\i adverbial particle;
\f0\i0  uteghmun tagikuvek \'91when you return\'92	backward	returning								contrary (on the ~)			homeward; backward; returning; on the contrary		< utegh(te)-
\f2\i terminalis				
\f0\i0 uteghmun	uteghmun	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
uteghnigh-	ens4yb4-	return from a trip		uteghnightuq \'91he returned\'92 /													to return from a trip		< utegh(te)-?-				uteghnigh-	uteghnigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
uteghpaarkitaagh-	ens5g6hrbn64-	pace back and forth															to pace back and forth		< utegh(te)-?-				uteghparkitagh-	uteghpxrkitxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u257 \u1088 \u1082 \u1080 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
uteghpaghte-	ens5gf5ns-	return quickly															to return quickly		< utegh(te)-?-				uteghpaghte-	uteghpaghte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uteghpagtagh-	ens5gf[nf4-	go back and forth			do over again												to go back and forth; to do over again		< utegh(te)-?-				uteghpagtagh-	uteghpagtagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uteghte-	ens5ns-	come back		uteghtuq \'91he came back, changed plans\'92 / uutghutaa \'91he brought it back, changed his mind about it\'92	turn back	return								change plans			to come back; to turn back; to return; to change plans		PE ut03-				uteghte-	uteghte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uteghvagh-	ens4df4-	step back		uteghvaghtuq \'91he stepped back, he went further in\'92; uteghvaghaa \'91he pulled it back, he took it further in\'92 /	pull back	go further into the house											to step or pull back; to go further into the house		< utegh(te)-vagh-				uteghvagh-	uteghvagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1099 \u1271 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
utkusae	enreczs	trap, steel, for animals		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  = unkusa	braining trap activated by twisted sinew cord under tension												steel trap for animals; braining trap activated by twisted sinew cord under tension		from Chukchi utkuc\'920n \'91trap\'92	14			utkusae	utkusae	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1103 \u1099 \
Utngusighnaq	En3]ecb4yf2	Olngooseenuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Olngooseenuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		< PE ut&u3				Utngusighnaq	Utngusighnaq	\uc0\u1059 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
utumek	enevsr	earth			clay	soil											earth; clay; soil.		PE u(u)tu(!)				utumek	utumek	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \
utuqa	ene2f	old thing			aged thing												old thing; aged thing	yrgjldb;ysq. ytrhfcnjhjgysq	PE utuqqa3		CK V & E 130 (Russ voc)		utuqa	utuqa	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \
utuqaluk	ene2fk/r	old (very ~ thing)															very old thing		< utaqa-?-				utuqaluk	utuqaluk	\uc0\u1091 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \
Utuqsit	Ene2cbn	Gambell (area of large rocks on the mountain behind ~)		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 area of large rocks on the mountain behind Gambell						Utuqsit	Utuqsit	\uc0\u1059 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \
uugg	8[			
\f2\i particle; used with reference to something dirty																			
\f0\i0 ugg	xgg	\uc0\u1263 \u1093 \

\f1\b uughha\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 85f\super s	\nosupersub porcelain															porcelain		PE u33a3				ughhae	xghhae	\uc0\u1263 \u1203 \u1072 \u1099 \

\f1\b uughhe-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 85s-\'a1	gooey (get ~)		uughhuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uughhaa \'91it got gooey\'92 /	dirtied (be ~)												to get gooey; to be dirtied		PE u33a3				ughhe-1	xghhe-1	\uc0\u1263 \u1203 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub uughhe-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 85s-\'99	drift away with the current		uughhuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uughhaa \'91it drifted away\'92 / Angwaaghun aga 
\f2\i uughhaa
\f0\i0 . \'91The oar 
\f2\i drifted away
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 172)													to drift away with the current		PY-S u30-				ughhe-2	xghhe-2	\uc0\u1263 \u1203 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub uughhun	85ey	sea ice (first pieces of ~ moving toward shore in winter, preceding a large field of ice moving in)		
\f2\i also used in the dual,
\f0\i0  uughhutek, 
\f2\i for this type of ice; see item 92 on list in
\f0\i0  Oozeva et al. 2004	ice cake blown off from main ice												first pieces of sea ice moving toward shore in winter, preceding a large field of ice moving in; ice cake blown off from main ice		< uughh-(u)n				ughhun	xghhun	\uc0\u1263 \u1203 \u1091 \u1085 \
uughqa	852f	south side		uughqa 'south'; 
\f2\i when inflecting, this word acts as a 3s-s possessed form, and has relative case
\f0\i0  n, 
\f2\i and localis, terminalis and ablative modalis in
\f0\i0  n (
\f2\i rather than
\f0\i0  m): Unaami ukavek 
\f2\i uughqan
\f0\i0  tunganganun eslughllequnga. 'Tomorrow I will down there in the direction of 
\f2\i the south
\f0\i0 .' (UNGIPAGHAGH. 162); uughqanun 'to the south'; uughqani 'in the south'; (see also aywaa, kellii, and kilgaa); 
\f2\i but note,
\f0\i0  uughqangani \'91on its south side\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  uqeq	lee side												south side; lee side; the south						ughqa	xghqa	\uc0\u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \
uughqaghtaq	852f5nf2	wave (swamping ~)		uughqaghtaghllak \'91big sea swell\'92; Atghaghaqsaghluta qukaghinnemta 
\f2\i uughqaghtaghllaget
\f0\i0  kaannemteki uteghtaqluta. \'91As we were going back we ran into big 
\f2\i sea swells
\f0\i0  in the middle [of the passage] and we would have to turn back [several times].\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:108)	sea swell	swell (sea ~)											swamping wave; sea swell		< uughqaghte-aq				ughqaghtaq	xghqaghtaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uughqaghte-	852f5ns-	get up onto something suddenly															to suddenly get up onto something		< uugte-qaghte-				ughqaghte-	xghqaghte-	\uc0\u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uughqu	852e	spotted seal		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 seal, spotted	
\f2\i Phoca largha											
\f0\i0 spotted seal 
\f2\i (Phoca largha)						
\f0\i0 ughqu	xghqu	\uc0\u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \
uughquvak	852edfr	seal, spotted, large			spotted seal, large	
\f2\i Phoca largha 
\f0\i0 (spotted seal) large											large spotted seal
\f2\i  (Phoca largha)		
\f0\i0 < uughqu-vak				ughquvak	xghquvak	\uc0\u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
uughqwaaq	852162	seal, spotted, adult			spotted seal, adult	
\f2\i Phoca largha 
\f0\i0 (spotted seal) adult											adult spotted seal 
\f2\i (Phoca largha)		
\f0\i0 < uughqu-?-				ughqwaq	xghqwxq	\uc0\u1263 \u1203 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
uughtugh-	85ne4-	wash one\'92s hands		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ughvugh-													to wash one\'92s hands						ughtugh-	xghtugh-	\uc0\u1263 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
uughyu	84m/	sea squirt said to taste somewhat like tobacco		
\f2\i exact identification undetermined													
\f0\i0 a type of sea squirt said to taste somewhat like tobacco						ughyu	xghyu	\uc0\u1263 \u1271 \u1100 \u1102 \
uugka	8[rf	east		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); for
\f0\i0  uughqa ?													east				CK Rub 556		ugka	xgka	\uc0\u1263 \u1093 \u1082 \u1072 \
uugllegagh-	8[k]suf4-	come up in a group															to come up in a group		< uugte-?-				ugllegagh-	xgllegagh-	\uc0\u1263 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uugna	8uyf	exit (one toward ~)		
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  ug-; 
\f2\i restricted demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: 
\f0\i0 ugum \'91(of) the one down there\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun: 
\f0\i0 uugkut \'91those down there\'92; 
\f2\i vocative:
\f0\i0  uugyuq \'91you, down there\'92; uugkughsi \'91you (pl) down there\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun:
\f0\i0  taawna \'91that one down there\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb:
\f0\i0  ugani \'91down there\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb: 
\f0\i0 ugavek \'91to down there\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb:
\f0\i0  uuggun \'91through down there\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb:
\f0\i0  uugken \'91from down there\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional:
\f0\i0  uga \'91there (down there)!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 taawani \'91there, down there\'92	west (one toward ~)	northwest (one toward ~)											that one toward the exit from inside; that one toward the west; that one toward the northwest; that one down toward the exit in terms of topography; Gambell from Savoonga		PE demo. u!-				ugna	xgna	\uc0\u1263 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \
uugsilghaq	8[cbk4f2	walrus lying on ice		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, 
\f0\i0 uugsilghat
\f2\i , for sea mammals at breeding grounds	
\f0\i0 sea mammals at breeding grounds												walrus lying on ice; sea mammals at breeding grounds		< uugte-?		CK Rub 558		ugsilghaq	xgsilghaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
Uugsilghet	8[cbk4sn	Niyrakpak Lagoon (site in ~ on St. Lawrence Is. where small seals come up on shore)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices; probably essentially the same word as
\f0\i0  uugsilghat \'91sea mammals\'92 hauling out ground\'92													site in Niyrakpak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. where small seals come up on shore		< uugte-?-				Ugsilghet	Xgsilghet	\uc0\u1263 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \
Uugsit	*[cbn	Aghsit Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Aghsit Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Ugsit	Xgsit	\uc0\u1262 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 \u1090 \
uugta	8[nf	sea mammal resting on land or ice															sea mammal resting on land or ice		< ugte-				ugta	xgta	\uc0\u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \
uugtaghaq	8[nf4f2	bird sitting on land or ice		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 bird sitting on land or ice		< uugta-ghaq		CK Rub 558		ugtaghaq	xgtaghaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
uugte-	8[ns-	get up onto something		uugtuq \'91it got up onto something\'92; uugtaa \'91it got up onto it\'92 /													to get up onto something		PY-S u!t0-				ugte-	xgte-	\uc0\u1263 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uuhuk	8]er	go!		
\f2\i exclamatory particle; 
\f0\i0 = guhuk; 
\f2\i the initial long vowel is often lengthened even further	
\f0\i0 start!												go!; start!						uhuk	xhuk	\uc0\u1263 \u1100 \u1091 \u1082 \
uuhuuk	8]8r			
\f2\i exclamatory particle said when one is about to lift a heavy object																			
\f0\i0 uhuk	xhxk	\uc0\u1263 \u1100 \u1263 \u1082 \
uuk	8r	oops!		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  = huk; uukaku	watch out!	oh dear!											oops!; watch out!; oh dear!						uk	xk	\uc0\u1263 \u1082 \
uukaq	8rf2	codfish		
\f2\i general term, but may also refer to a particular species (exact identification undetermined); sometimes called \'93Arctic cod\'94, though the actual fish with this name, the 
\f0\i0 Gadus morhua,
\f2\i  is not found in the area													
\f0\i0 codfish		PE u9uka3				ukaq	xkaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
uukna	8ry]f	approaching (one ~)		
\f2\i base:
\f0\i0  uk-; 
\f2\i demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun:
\f0\i0  ukum \'91(of) the one approaching\'92; 
\f2\i absolutive/relative plural pronoun:
\f0\i0  ukegkut \'91those approaching\'92; 
\f2\i vocative: 
\f0\i0 uuksuq \'91you, approaching\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: 
\f0\i0 taakwna \'91that one approaching\'92; 
\f2\i localis adverb: 
\f0\i0 ukani \'91near here\'92; 
\f2\i terminalis adverb:
\f0\i0  ukavek \'91to nearby\'92; 
\f2\i vialis adverb:
\f0\i0  ukagun \'91through nearby\'92; 
\f2\i ablative adverb:
\f0\i0  ukegken \'91from nearby\'92; 
\f2\i interjectional: 
\f0\i0 uka \'91here, nearby, coming this way!\'92; 
\f2\i anaphoric localis adverb:
\f0\i0  taakwani \'91there, near hear\'92	near (one ~ here)												that one approaching; that one near here		PE demo. uk-				ukna	xkna	\uc0\u1263 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \
uuknaliqe-	8ry]fkb2s-	prophecy		\'85 nengyumta ungipamsuga Iteghyaghaam taana mangteghasqughhaq, kuugghan 
\f2\i uuknaliqaqngami
\f0\i0  nekeftekaqeftaa church-enguluku. \'91\'85 our grandmother had talked about how Iteghyaghaq, her brother, because he had 
\f2\i prophecied
\f0\i0 , had set up that little house to be a church.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3.66); Tawaten pilleghqun 
\f2\i uuknaliqistem
\f0\i0  Jeremiah-am 
\f2\i uuknaliqellgha 
\f0\i0 apeghiiqaq \'85. \'91In that way the 
\f2\i prophet 
\f0\i0 Jeremiah\'92s 
\f2\i prophecy
\f0\i0  came to pass \'85.\'92 (Matthew 2.17)													to prophecy		< uukna-liqe-				uknaliqe-	xknaliqe-	\uc0\u1263 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
uuknaliqista	8ry]fkb2bcnf	prophet		
\f2\i used in Bible translation; 
\f0\i0 Ilangit pikat, \'93
\f2\i Uuknaliqistenguuq
\f0\i0 , neghighluku 
\f2\i uuknaliqistestun
\f0\i0  ayuquq.\'94 \'91Some of them said, \'93He is a 
\f2\i prophet
\f0\i0 , he is like the 
\f2\i prophets
\f0\i0  of old.\'94\'92 (Mark 6.15) 													prophet		< uuknaliqe-i\super 1\nosupersub -(s)ta				uknaliqista	xknaliqista	\uc0\u1263 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
Uuleq	*ks2	Uelen (well north of the (Central Siberian) Yupik area)		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Uelen (well north of the (Central Siberian) Yupik area)						Uleq	Xleq	\uc0\u1262 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
uullghiitaq	8k]57nf2	brace															brace		< ullegh-(ng)iitaq				ullghitaq	xllghxtaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uullghuk	8k]5er	hot-springs		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 hot-springs						ullghuk	xllghuk	\uc0\u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1091 \u1082 \
uulmun	8kvey	backward		
\f2\i particle; cf.
\f0\i0  uteghte-	rear (toward the rear)												backward; toward the rear						ulmun	xlmun	\uc0\u1263 \u1083 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
uulqaghtekaq*	8k]2f5nsrf2	boot (men\'92s summer sealskin short ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 men\'92s summer sealskin short boot				CK Rub 540		ulqaghtekaq*	xlqaghtekaq*	\uc0\u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
uulqiq	8k]2b2	potato, wild or domestic (store-bought)			claytonia (spring beauty) 	
\f2\i Clatonia tuberosa Pall											
\f0\i0 wild "potato"; claytonia (spring beauty) 
\f2\i (Clatonia tuberosa Pall); 
\f0\i0 domestic or store-bought potato		PE ulqi3				ulqiq	xlqiq	\uc0\u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1179 \
uulsugnaq	8k]c/uyf2	ice block that is unstable, can easily roll over if stepped on		
\f2\i see item 93 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												ice block that is unstable, can easily roll over if stepped on		< uulte-yug-naq				ulsugnaq	xlsugnaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
uulte-	8k]ns-	turn inside-out		uultuq \'91it turned inside out\'92; uultaa \'91he turned it inside out, bad-mouthed him\'92 / uulqaghtuq \'91it suddenly turned inside-out\'92	gossip about	bad mouth								change one\'92s character when becoming mature			to turn inside-out; to gossip about; to bad-mouth; to change one's character when becoming mature		PE ul0t-				ulte-	xlte-	\uc0\u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uultekaq	8k]nsrf2	boot (hair-in sealskin ~)															hair-in sealskin boot		< uulte-kaq\super 1				\nosupersub ultekaq	xltekaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
uultelleq	8k]nsk]s2	ice (rolled-over chunk of ~)		
\f2\i see item 94 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	sea ice type												rolled-over chunk of ice		< uulte-lleq				ultelleq	xltelleq	\uc0\u1263 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
uumgaq	8vuf2	box		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  uumgak,
\f2\i  for one container	
\f0\i0 container for small items												box; container for small items		< umeg-aq				umgaq	xmgaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1084 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
uumtaq	8vnf2	storage area under sleeping area of a semi-subterranean house (
\f2\i nenglu
\f0\i0 )			cellar												storage area under sleeping area of a semi-subterranean house (
\f2\i nenglu
\f0\i0 ); cellar				Kallag. 98		umtaq	xmtaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1084 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uun'gutaq	8yuenf2	left (something ~ for others)		= unegtuusaq													something left for others		< unegte-(u)taq				un'gutaq	xn'gutaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1085 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uunghaghsi-	8y4f5cb-	aim harpoon															to aim harpoon		< uunghaq-?-				unghaghsi-	xnghaghsi-	\uc0\u1263 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 -\
uunghaq*	8y4f2	harpoon			ice probe or tester												harpoon; ice probe or tester		PE un03a3		the ice probe gloss is from SLI JR. DICT. p.172, also in Kallagneghet p. 77, SULUWET p. 108		unghaq*	xnghaq*	\uc0\u1263 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
uunghiitaq	8y47nf2	food prepared and consumed in conjunction with the dedication of a harpoon		\'85 
\f2\i uunghiitaq
\f0\i0  seghleghllagunaquq ighivgaghmi whani. \'91The 
\f2\i festive delicacies 
\f0\i0 are going to be quite plentiful this evening.\'92 (SULUWET 88)	delicacy	festive delicacy											food prepared and consumed in conjunction with the dedication of a harpoon; festive delicacy		< uunghaq-?		Rub. 465 and Suluwet 109		unghitaq	xnghxtaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1085 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uunghun	8y4ey	amulet for protection		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 amulet for protection				CK Rub 546		unghun	xnghun	\uc0\u1263 \u1085 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
uunmek	8yvsr	including		
\f2\i conjunctive particle;
\f0\i0  laalighfikaghtaqsaqumegteggu aghnaq ilangan, uunmek uyughaan the woman's relatives should come to visit her, especially her sister; talwa kiigmi whani inghuyaqaghpenaamta, uunmek elpek inghuyaghyuneghtuqaten we didn't even go berry picking this summer, not even you who likes to go berry picking	and also	especially											including; and also						unmek	xnmek	\uc0\u1263 \u1085 \u1084 \u1099 \u1082 \
uupa	8gf	\'93sea peach\'94		uupat \'91sea peaches\'92	Halocynthia aurantia	penis (human)											\'93sea peach\'94 
\f2\i (Halocynthia aurantia)
\f0\i0 ; penis (human)						upa	xpa	\uc0\u1263 \u1087 \u1072 \
uupte-	8gns-	burst out crying		uuptuq \'91he burst out crying\'92 / uuptutkaa \'91he burst out crying about it\'92	cry (burst out crying)												to burst out crying		PE up0t-				upte-	xpte-	\uc0\u1263 \u1087 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b uusa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 8cz\super s	\nosupersub hose		= huusa\super e													\nosupersub hose		from English \'91hose\'92	SLI			usae	xsae	\uc0\u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1099 \
uusleq	8ck]s2	pressure ridge		
\f2\i see item 97 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004; = vuusleq	piled-up ice	ice jam								sea ice type			pressure ridge; piled-up ice; ice jam		< vuu-?-lleq				usleq	xsleq	\uc0\u1263 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
uusneghwaaq	8cy]s4162	hill, small		Tawavek 
\f2\i uusneghwaaghem
\f0\i0  qaaynganun mayughyalghiimi saama esghaghii maalghuk mengteghaak. \'91When he got up on top of the 
\f2\i small hill
\f0\i0  he saw two houses.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 69)													small hill		< uusneq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				usneghwaq	xsneghwxq	\uc0\u1263 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
uusneq	8cy]s2			uusneghem qaaygnanun mayughlunga aruughlunga yuuk piyuk esghaghluku ullghitakun paayghaqa \'91I went up to the top of the bank to look around and saw a man on foot and then went to meet him by vehicle\'92													river or ocean bank; small hill		PY usn0q (under PE uyt0-)		Akiingqwaghneghet 112		usneq	xsneq	\uc0\u1263 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
uusqaayak	8c26zr	ice coming into view on the horizon		
\f2\i see item 95 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	elevated part of sea ice	sea ice type											ice coming into view on the horizon; elevated part of sea ice		< uusqaq-?-				usqayak	xsqxyak	\uc0\u1263 \u1089 \u1179 \u257 \u1103 \u1082 \
uusqagh-	8c2f4-	deep (be ~)		uusqaghtuq \'91it is high\'92 / uusqapigtuq \'91it is very high\'92	high (be ~)												to be deep; to be high						usqagh-	xsqagh-	\uc0\u1263 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uusqaq	8c2f2	deep place			high place												deep place; high place						usqaq	xsqaq	\uc0\u1263 \u1089 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
uusqite-	8c2bns-	reach a deep area															to reach a deep area				CK Rub 554 CK 		usqite-	xsqite-	\uc0\u1263 \u1089 \u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uutghumigtagh-	8n5evb[nf4-	repeat over and over															to repeat over and over		< utegh(te)-?-				utghumigtagh-	xtghumigtagh-	\uc0\u1263 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uutghute-	8n5ens-	return (it)		uutghutaa \'91he returned it\'92 /													to return (it)		< utegh(te)-(u)te-		CK Rub 555 CK 		utghute-	xtghute-	\uc0\u1263 \u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uutqiigh-	8n274-	move back or backward															to move back or backward		< utegh(te)-?-				utqigh-	xtqxgh-	\uc0\u1263 \u1090 \u1179 \u1251 \u1271 -\
uuvganeng	8dufys3	same from the beginning		
\f2\i adverbial particle;
\f0\i0  uuvganeng ima liisimakegkaqaghput natekeruugngalleq \'91from the beginning we knew that something was wrong\'92; uuvganeng ima aghnaghaghhaaluni ineqsunaghtuq \'91she has been very pretty since she was a little girl\'92; uuvganeng aghnaq kakiyuuq \'91the woman has always been a good sewer\'92	always (with reference to the past)												the same from the beginning; always (with reference to the past)		< ?-
\f2\i abl.-mod.				
\f0\i0 uvganeng	xvganeng	\uc0\u1263 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1085 \u1099 \u1187 \
Uuyavak	*zdfr	Gambell (area to southwest of present-day ~)		
\f2\i see Map 7 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 area to southwest of present-day Gambell						Uyavak	Xyavak	\uc0\u1262 \u1103 \u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
uuyni	8qyb	underarm odor		uuyninga \'91his odor\'92	odor (underarm ~)												underarm odor		from Chukchi ?	x			uyni	xyni	\uc0\u1263 \u1253 \u1085 \u1080 \
uuynite-	8qybns-	odor (have a strong underarm ~)															to have a strong underarm odor		< uuy(ni)-nite\super \'a1\nosupersub - 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  < uuyni-te\super \'a3\nosupersub -				uynite-	xynite-	\uc0\u1263 \u1253 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uvagha-	edf4f-	roll around (of dogs, children)		uvaghaaq \'91he is rolling around\'92 /	show by one's body movements and expressions that one is pleased with what is being said about him (slang)												to roll around (of dogs, children); to show by one's body movements and expressions that one is pleased with what is being said about him (slang)		PE uva(C)a- (under PE uv03-)				uvagha-	uvagha-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 -\
uvegh-	eds4-	overturn or keel over		uveghtuq \'91it overturned\'92 / uuvghaquq \'91it overturns\'92; uveghtaa \'91he overturned it\'92	topple	capsize								carried away (become ~ with what one is doing)			to keel over; to topple; to capsize; to overturn; to get carried away with what one is doing		PE uv03-				uvegh-	uvegh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 -\
uveghni-	eds4yb-	pleased (be ~)		uveghniiq \'91he is pleased\'92 / uveghnitkaa \'91he is pleased with it\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 uvegh-	thankful (be ~)	pride and joy (be full of ~)											to be pleased; to be thankful; to be full of pride and joy						uveghni-	uveghni-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1271 \u1085 \u1080 -\
uvegtagh-	eds[nf4-	tossed upwards from a walrus hide held taut around the edges by a group of people (be ~)		uvegtaghtuq \'91he's being tossed up\'92; uvegtaghtut \'91they are engaged in a blanket-toss\'92 / uvegtaghtaat \'91they are tossing him up\'92; Maaten ilangani, kiigyagu, Ungazighmiit 
\f2\i uvegtaamalghiit
\f0\i0 . Qalu 
\f2\i uvegtalghiinun
\f0\i0  aglaamalghii. \'91One time when it was summer, the people of Ungaziq were 
\f2\i having a blanket-toss.
\f0\i0  Qalu went over to those 
\f2\i having the blanket toss
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 27)	blanket toss (engage in a traditional ~)												to be tossed upwards from a walrus hide held taut around the edges by a group of people; to engage in a traditional \'93blanket toss\'94						uvegtagh-	uvegtagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uvegtaq	eds[nf2	blanket-toss (traditonal Eskimo ~)															traditional Eskimo "blanket-toss"						uvegtaq	uvegtaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uvegte-	eds[ns-	act before something else happens		uvegllukumi sangan tugunanighsigu? \'91why didn't you take it before that happened?\'92; Mekelngiighhaam tukughani aqnighlluki mulumaan naangan clinic-mun aglaasimakanga. Health aide-em pimakanga, \'93
\f2\i Uveglluku
\f0\i0  tagitqaghhnaqegpenaan.\'94 The little boy hurt his ankle and some time later his mother took him to the clinic. The health aid said to her, \'93Why didn\'92t you bring him 
\f2\i before (it got bad)
\f0\i0 .\'94\'92 (KALLAG. 102)													to act before something else happens						uvegte-	uvegte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uvelegtagh-	edsks[nf4-	vibrate		uvelegtaghtuq \'91it is vibrating\'92 / uvelegtaghtaa \'91he is making it vibrate\'92	bounce												to vibrate; to bounce		PE 0v0(3)l0!-				uvelegtagh-	uvelegtagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uveluk	edsk/r			
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  = evluk													sea swell; ocean wave		i&(0)l0!				uveluk	uveluk	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \
uvi-	edb-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > uvilighneq, uvita, uvinek, uvitangigh-																			uvi-	uvi-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1080 -\
uvilighneq	edbkb4ys2	next one		uvilighnequtuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  are neighbors\'92	neighbor	relative (kin)											next one; neighbor; relative		< uvi-lighneq				uvilighneq	uvilighneq	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
uvinek	edbysr	skin, human		uvinkegtaq \'91one with a nice complexion\'92	relative, close	back part of an animal								torso			human skin; close relative; back part of an animal; torso		< uvi-?		CK Rub 521 on gloss 4; CK on gloss 3		uvinek	uvinek	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1099 \u1082 \
Uvingen	Edb3sy	Anadyr in Chukotka (well southwest of the usual Yupik area)		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices;  
\f0\i0 = Wingen													Anadyr in Chukotka (well southwest of the usual Yupik area)						Uvingen	Uvingen	\uc0\u1059 \u1074 \u1080 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 \
uvininghaq	edbyby4f2	whale skin and fat with meat on it															whale skin and fat with meat on it		< uvi-?		CK Rub 521		uvininghaq	uvininghaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
uvinke-	edbyrs-	rely on			depend on	confide in											to rely on; to depend on; to confide in		< uvinek-ke\super 1\nosupersub -				uvinke-	uvinke-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1082 \u1099 -\
uvinkesuggaaq	edbyrsce[62	walrus, young		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 skin of small walrus												young walrus; skin of a small walrus		< uvinek-?		CK Rub 521		uvinkesuggaq	uvinkesuggxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1091 \u1093 \u257 \u1179 \
uvinkwaa-	edbyr16-	feel like one is in the same unfortunate situation as another															to feel like one is in the same unfortunate situation as another		< uvinek-?-				uvinkwa-	uvinkwx-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1082 \u1265 \u257 -\
uviqliq*	edb2k]b2	next one			neighbor	relative (kin)											next one; neighbor; relative		< uvi-qliq				uviqliq*	uviqliq*	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
uvita	edbnf	yard around house		uvitngani 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uvitangani \'91around it\'92; = uwita	kinfolk	area								surface			yard around house; kinfolk; area; surface		< uvi-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -				uvita	uvita	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \
uvitangigh-	edbnf3b4-	pass close by (it)		uvitangighaa \'91he passed close by it\'92 /													to pass close by (it)		< uvita-(ng)igh-				uvitangigh-	uvitangigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
uvitmig-	edbnv]bu-	put (it) in the yard															to put (it) in the yard		< uvita-mig-				uvitmig-	uvitmig-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1080 \u1075 -\
uvlegh-	edks4-	shimmer		uvleqegtaq \'91glittery thing\'92; = evlegh-, qavlegh-, qelmegh-	glitter	shiny (be ~)											to shimmer; to glitter; to be shiny		PE q0vl03-				uvlegh-	uvlegh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 -\
uvleghsagh-	edks5cz4-	shine (it)		uvleghsaghtuq \'91he cleaned himself thoroughly\'92; uvleghsaghaa \'91he cleaned it thoroughly\'92 /	polish	clean thoroughly											to shine (it); to polish; to clean thoroughly		< uvlegh-sagh-				uvleghsagh-	uvleghsagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
uvleghtagh-	edks5nf4-	flash															to flash		< uvlegh-tagh\super 2\nosupersub -				uvleghtagh-	uvleghtagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uwita	e1bnf	yard around house		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  = uvita	kinfolk	area								surface			yard around house; kinfolk; area; surface		< uvi-te\super \'a2				\nosupersub uwita	uwita	\uc0\u1091 \u1265 \u1080 \u1090 \u1072 \

\f1\b uya-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ez-\'a1			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > uyaghqutaq, uyamig-, uyamik, uyangsaq, uyangte-, uyaquq															PE uya(qu3)				uya-1	uya-1	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub uya-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ez-\'99			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > uyatiite-, uyatu-, uyavaq, uyavagh-																			uya-2	uya-2	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 -\super 2\
\nosupersub uyaghqutaq	ez52enf2	amulet worn by women to protect their children		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 collar for dog												amulet worn by women to protect their children; dog collar		< uya\super 1\nosupersub -qutaq		CK Rub 561		uyaghqutaq	uyaghqutaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyamig-	ezvbu-	carry on one\'92s shoulder															to carry on one\'92s shoulder		< uya\super 1\nosupersub -mig-				uyamig-	uyamig-	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\

\f1\b uyamik\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ezvbr\super \'a1	\nosupersub shoulder load															shoulder load		< uya\super 1\nosupersub -mik				uyamik1	uyamik1	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 1\

\f1\b uyamik\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ezvbr\super \'99	\nosupersub needle case															needle case		< uya\super 1\nosupersub -mik				uyamik2	uyamik2	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 2\
uyangsaq	ez3cz2	oldsquaw duck			
\f2\i Clangula hyemalis												
\f0\i0 oldsquaw
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 duck
\f2\i  (Clangula hyemalis)		
\f0\i0 < uya\super 1\nosupersub -?-				uyangsaq	uyangsaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1187 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
uyangte-	ez3ns-	stretch one's neck to see better		uyangtuq \'91he stretched to get a better view\'92													to stretch one's neck to see better		< uya\super 1\nosupersub -?-				uyangte-	uyangte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1187 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uyaqughiitaq	ez2e47nf2	necktie			collar for dog	scarf											necktie; dog collar; scarf		< uyaquq-(ng)iitaq				uyaqughitaq	uyaqughxtaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyaqughlliqe-	ez2e5k]b2s-	neck pains (have ~)			pains (have neck ~)												to have neck pains		< uyaquq-lliqe-				uyaqughlliqe-	uyaqughlliqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
Uyaqughviget	Ez2e4db4sn	Maknek River (rocks off shore near mouth of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 6 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 rocks off shore near mouth of Maknek River		< uyaquq-vik-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Uyaqughviget	Uyaqughviget	\uc0\u1059 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1271 \u1099 \u1090 \
uyaquq	ez2e2	neck (anatomical)		Quyngim, tungtum 
\f2\i uyaqghwan
\f0\i0  asingan melqwi taakelghiit. \'91The hairs under the reindeer\'92s or caribou\'92s 
\f2\i neck
\f0\i0  are long.\'92 (KALLAG. 105)													neck (anatomical)		< uya\super 1\nosupersub -quq				uyaquq	uyaquq	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
uyataq	eznf2	leash		uyatighluku \'91using a rope to haul it\'92	strap	rope for hauling											leash; strap; rope for hauling		PY-S uya(C)aq		CK Rub 560 CK		uyataq	uyataq	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyatiite-	ezn7ns-	approach (start to ~)		uyatiitaa \'91he started to get closer to it\'92	near (come nearer to)	narrow the distance to (it)											to start to approach; to near; to narrow the distance to (it)		< uya\super 2\nosupersub -?-				uyatite-	uyatxte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1090 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uyatu-	ezne-	far away (be ~)		uyatuuq \'91it is far\'92 / naten uyatutkaa? \'91how far is it?\'92	distant (be ~ (in time or space))												to be far away; to be distant (in space or time)		PY uyatu-; < uya\super 2\nosupersub -tu-				uyatu-	uyatu-	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1090 \u1091 -\
uyatutala	eznenfkz	distance to (it)		uyatutalanga \'91the distance to it\'92													distance to (it)		< uyatu-tala				uyatutala	uyatutala	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
uyavagh-	ezdf4-	far (go ~)			go far												to go far		< uya\super 2\nosupersub -vagh-		CK V & E  118, CK (-nun)		uyavagh-	uyavagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uyavaghtaq	ezdf5nf2	something from far away															something from far away		< uyavaq-taq\super 2				\nosupersub uyavaghtaq	uyavaghtaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1074 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyavaq	ezdf2	distance or distant place		uyavani \'91in the distance\'92; uyavantuq \'91it is far away\'92; uyavanun \'91to a distant place\'92; uyavaneng \'91from a distant place\'92													distance or distant place		PE u&ava3 (under PE u&an); < uya\super 2\nosupersub -vaq				uyavaq	uyavaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1103 \u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyegte-	eqs[ns-	pass things out		uyegtuq \'91he distributed things\'92; uyegtaa \'91he passed something out to her, or passed it out\'92 / uyegtekaaguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uyegtaaguq \'91it has been distributed\'92; Aghvengelghiit naasiiqaghhaghmeng mangtagmeng 
\f2\i uyegtaghaghtut
\f0\i0  taglaghyameng. \'91The boat crew that caught a whale 
\f2\i distributed
\f0\i0  small trial portions of muktuk as soon as they came ashore.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 106)	distribute things												to pass things out; to distribute things		PY-S uy0!-				uyegte-	uyegte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uyengpalla-	eqs3gfk]z-	bounce or bob up and down from a squatting position		uyengpallaaq \'91he is bouncing up and down\'92 / 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  uyengpalla-													to bounce or bob up and down from a squatting position		PY-S uyu&0-				uyengpalla-	uyengpalla-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 -\
uyengqagh-	eqs32f4-	bob up and down slowly		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  uyengpalla-													to slowly bob up and down		PY-S uyu&0-				uyengqagh-	uyengqagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uygaaq	equ62	sealskin which has been de-haired, bleached by the winter weather, for use for trim on skin-boots															sealskin which has been de-haired, bleached by the winter weather, for use for trim on skin-boots						uygaq	uygxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 \
uyghagaq	eq4fuf2	pebble			rocky part of mountain	game using walrus teeth or small stones for counters											pebble; rocky part of mountain; a game using walrus teeth or small stones for counters		< uyghak-ghaq				uyghagaq	uyghagaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyghagtaq	eq4f[nf2	rock hanging from and hold in place the walrus hide room of the traditional dome-shaped house		negaghpagmun qilleghsimiit uyghagtat \'91they tied the sinkers onto the fishnet\'92	sinker, stone, on a fishnet												rock hanging from and hold in place the walrus hide room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.); stone sinker on a fishnet 		< uyghak-taq\super 1				\nosupersub uyghagtaq	uyghagtaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyghagtightugh-	eq4f[nb5ne4-	surround with rocks															to surround with rocks		< uyghak-?-		CK Rub 530		uyghagtightugh-	uyghagtightugh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
uyghak	eq4fr	rock		Quutmun taslughluku 
\f2\i uyghagem
\f0\i0  saaghwakun aqumesimakangat. \'91Leading him by the hand to the shore they sat him down beside a 
\f2\i rock
\f0\i0 .\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 47)	stone												rock; stone		PE uyu3a!				uyghak	uyghak	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1082 \
uyghamqiighwaq	eq4fv171f2	pebbles															pebbles		< uyghak-?		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 142		uyghamqighwaq	uyghamqxghwaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1084 \u1265 \u1251 \u1265 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyghapak	eq4fgfr	rocks (multitude of ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 multitude of rocks		< uyghak-?		CK Rub 530		uyghapak	uyghapak	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
uyghapellegaq	eq4fgsk]suf2	pebbly beach			beach, pebbly												pebbly beach		< uyghak-?				uyghapellegaq	uyghapellegaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyghapellegaq	eq4fgsk]suf2	jagged rock			rock, jagged												jagged rock		< uyghak-?		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 142		uyghapellegaq	uyghapellegaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyghigh-	eq4b4-	set an anchor (for boat or dogteam)		uyghightuq \'91he set an anchor\'92; uyghighaa \'91he anchored it\'92 / uyghiimaaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uyghighngaaq \'91it is anchored\'92													to set an anchor (for boat or dogteam)		< uyghak-ligh-				uyghigh-	uyghigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
uyghiin	eq47y	anchor		= uyghitta													anchor		< uyghigh-(u)n				uyghin	uyghxn	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1271 \u1251 \u1085 \
uyghu	eq4e	niece of a man through his sister			nephew of a man through his sister												man's sister's child; niece of a man through his sister; nephew of a man through his sister		PE uyu3u(!)				uyghu	uyghu	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1271 \u1091 \
uygii-	equ7-	bleach sealskin for trimming material															to bleach sealskin for trimming material		< uygaaq-i\super 2\nosupersub -				uygi-	uygx-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1251 -\
uygiinghaq*	equ7y4f2	bleached sealskin used for trim			sealskin, bleached, used for trim												bleached sealskin used for trim		< uygii-nghaq				uyginghaq*	uygxnghaq*	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1251 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
uygu-	eque-	extend		uywaa \'91he extended it, added something to make it longer\'92 / uygulleqaa \'91he will extend it\'92; uygutaa \'91he added it onto something\'92; uygutuq \'91he got into a line of people\'92; uygututak \'91he connected them\sub 2\nosupersub  together; uygutaq \'91an extension\'92	add length to												to extend; to add length to		PE uy!u-				uygu-	uygu-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 -\

\f1\b uygu\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub eque\super \'a1	\nosupersub extension															extension		PE uy!u-				uygu1	uygu1	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 1\

\f1\b uygu\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub eque\super \'99	\nosupersub messenger			agent												messenger; agent						uygu2	uygu2	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 2\
uygughaq	eque4f2	extension around top of skin boat															extension around top of skin boat		< uygu-ghaq				uygughaq	uygughaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
uygulliiq	equek]b2	walrus skin put on the front part of roof of the traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i may be used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 uygulliighek
\f2\i , for one; see item 96 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004	newly formed extention of sea ice	sea ice (newly formed extension of sea ice)											walrus skin put on the front part of roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the 
\f2\i mangteghapik
\f0\i0  (q.v.); newly formed extension of sea ice		< uygu-?		CK Rub 529		uygulliq	uygullxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
uyguma-	equevf-	coo (to)		uygumaaq \'91he cooed to a baby\'92; uygumaa \'91he cooed to it\'92 / uygumatut \'91they are playing laughingly with each other, attracted to each other\'92	play laughingly (of children)	attracted to each other (be ~ (of young adults))								tease in a friendly way			to coo (to); to play laughingly (of children); to be attracted to each other (of young adults); to tease in a friendly way		< uygu-(i/u)ma- (?)				uyguma-	uyguma-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 -\
uyguneq	equeys2	connection or seam			joint	knot								extension piece			connection; joint; knot; seam; extension piece		< uygu-neq\super 2				\nosupersub uyguneq	uyguneq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
uygunghigh-	equey4b4-	disconnect an extension			untie												to disconnect an extension; to untie		< uyguneq-(ng)igh-				uygunghigh-	uygunghigh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1271 -\
uyguraq	equehf2	embroidery on the top of a reindeer-leg skin-boot		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); used in the plural,
\f0\i0  uygurat, 
\f2\i for one such embroidery													
\f0\i0 embroidery on the top of a reindeer-leg skin-boot		< uygu-?		CK Rub 529		uyguraq	uyguraq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyguregagh-	equehsuf4-	embellish or otherwise add to a story															to embellish or otherwise add to a story		< uygu-?				uyguregagh-	uyguregagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1091 \u1088 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uyguusaq	equ8cz2	gift		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 gift	gjlfhjr	< uygu-?-(u)saq		Rub. 529		uygusaq	uygxsaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1075 \u1263 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
uyiighaq	eq74f2	rope made from hide from a bearded seal															rope made from hide from a bearded seal		< uyiiq-ghaq				uyighaq	uyxghaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyiiq	eq72	rope, heavy and thick, made from hide of a baby walrus															heavy, thick, rope made from hide of a baby walrus		PE uya(C)aq (?)				uyiq	uyxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1251 \u1179 \
uyiq	eqb2	trimming from white suede on skin-boot		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 trimming from white suede on skin-boots				CK Rub 530		uyiq	uyiq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1080 \u1179 \
Uyneq	Eqys2	Gambell (first point on west coast south of ~)		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices	
\f0\i0 Ooynik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.												first point on west coast south of Gambell; Ooynik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.						Uyneq	Uyneq	\uc0\u1059 \u1253 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
uyug-	e/u-	sexual intercourse (have ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  usuk													to have sexual intercourse						uyug-	uyug-	\uc0\u1091 \u1102 \u1075 -\
uyughaq*	e/4f2	sibling, younger		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  uyuqliq													younger sibling		PY uyu3aq				uyughaq*	uyughaq*	\uc0\u1091 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyuq	e/2	hey you!		
\f2\i vocative particle; look under
\f0\i0  una	you (hey ~!)												hey you!						uyuq	uyuq	\uc0\u1091 \u1102 \u1179 \
uyuqliq*	e/2k]b2	younger one		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  uyughaq													younger one						uyuqliq*	uyuqliq*	\uc0\u1091 \u1102 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
uyvala-	eqdfkz-	practice sorcery		uyvalaaq \'91he is practicing sorcery\'92; uyvalaa \'91he is practicing sorcery on her (either to her detriment or to her benefit)\'92 /	sorcery (practice ~)												to practice sorcery		PY uyvala-				uyvala-	uyvala-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 -\
uyvalakegtaq	eqdfkfrs[nf2	shaman, powerful, who is inclined to do harm		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 powerful shaman who is inclined to do harm		< uyvala-kegtaq		CK Rub 528		uyvalakegtaq	uyvalakegtaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uyvasaghqe-	eqdfcz52s-	ward off evil spirits or sorcery by performing rituals		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 uyvala													to ward off evil spirits or sorcery by performing rituals						uyvasaghqe-	uyvasaghqe-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1074 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
uyviineq	eqd7ys2	sorceror			shaman, evil												sorceror; evil shaman		PE uyvi&it- (under PE uyvi)				uyvineq	uyvxneq	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1074 \u1251 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
uyviligh-	eqdbkb4-	forbid		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 convince												to forbid; to convince	pfghtofnm\\ hfpe,t;lfnm	PE uyvi		CK V & E 144; Rub 528		uyviligh-	uyviligh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1253 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
uzifqaghte-	epba2f5ns-	revolve fast or suddenly															to revolve fast or suddenly		< uzive-qaghte-				uzifqaghte-	uzifqaghte-	\uc0\u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1092 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
uziftaghwaaq	epbanf4162	top (spinning toy)															toy top		< uziftaq-(ghw/ngw/w)aaq				uziftaghwaq	uziftaghwxq	\uc0\u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1092 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
uziftaq	epbanf2	beheading device made of a whale shoulder blade			top (spinning toy)												beheading device made of a whale shoulder blade; toy top		< uzive-?-				uziftaq	uziftaq	\uc0\u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1092 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
uzimun	epbvey	circle (in a ~)		
\f2\i adverbial particle;
\f0\i0  qukaa aangqam igaqraghllaguuq uzimun \'91the middle of the ball has decorations all around it\'92	circumferentially	around (all ~)											in a circle; circumferentially; all around		< uzive-
\f2\i terminalis				
\f0\i0 uzimun	uzimun	\uc0\u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1084 \u1091 \u1085 \
uziva	epbdf	circular thing			vertebra of a whale	circular disk of cartilage											circular thing; vertebra of a whale; circular disk of cartilage		PE uyivva3 (under PE uyiv0-)				uziva	uziva	\uc0\u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u1072 \
uzive-	epbds-	revolve		uzivuq \'91he or it revolved or went around something\'92; uzivaa \'91he or it went around it\'92 / uziftaa \'91he made it go around, spun it\'92; uzivutaa \'91he went around with it\'92	rotate	go around								around (go ~)			to revolve; to go around; to rotate		PE uyiv0-				uzive-	uzive-	\uc0\u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 -\
uziveketaagh-	epbdsrsn64-	spin		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  qikmiq suumegkaq uziveketaaghaquq \'91the rabid dog is running in circles\'92	circles (go in ~ rapidly)												to spin; to go circles rapidly				CK Rub 528		uziveketagh-	uziveketxgh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u1099 \u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
uzivgagh-	epbduf4-	revolve															to keep on revolving or going around something		< uzive-?-				uzivgagh-	uzivgagh-	\uc0\u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
uzivneghtu-	epbdys5ne-	revolve fast or often															to revolve fast or often		< uzive-neghtu-				uzivneghtu-	uzivneghtu-	\uc0\u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 -\
uzivneq	epbdys2	circular section			revolution												circular section; revolution		< uzive-neq\super 2				\nosupersub uzivneq	uzivneq	\uc0\u1091 \u1079 \u1080 \u1074 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
vegaaq	dsu62	grass		Uksaanghani 
\f2\i vegaaqlu
\f0\i0 , nunivagseghaqlu paliqestanghani nemi tawani quuggutaqelghiit. \'91When autumn comes and 
\f2\i grass
\f0\i0  and tundra vegetation start to turn brown, then they gather their wood supply in the house.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 51)													grass		< vek-?				vegaq	vegxq	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 \
veghaq	ds4f2	whale fin			propeller												whale fin; propeller						veghaq	veghaq	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
veghite-	ds4bns-	somersault in the air			flip over forward (of a whale or person)												to somersault in the air; to flip over forward (of a whale or person)		< veghaq-?-				veghite-	veghite-	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
veghsaghtugh-	ds5cz5ne4-	go over to retrieve															to go over to retrieve		< veghte-yaghtugh-				veghsaghtugh-	veghsaghtugh-	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
veghte-	ds5ns-	take back something one has sold or given away		veghtaa \'91he took it back\'92 /	repossess												to take back something one has sold or given away; to repossess		PE uv03- (?)				veghte-	veghte-	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
veghute-	ds4ens-	give something back		veghutaa \'91he gave it back\'92 /													to give something back		< veghte-(u)te-				veghute-	veghute-	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
vegllengestaq	ds[k]s3scnf2	washcloth															washcloth		< veglluk-ngestaq				vegllengestaq	vegllengestaq	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
veglluk	ds[k]/r	towel		
\f2\i this is the term used on St. Lawrence Is.; in Chukotka, the English loanward, 
\f0\i0 tawli
\f2\i , is used													
\f0\i0 towel		< vek-lluk				veglluk	veglluk	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
vegsegaq	ds[csuf2	grass (bits of loose ~)															bits of loose grass		< vek-?-				vegsegaq	vegsegaq	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
vegtaaq	ds[n62	bumble bee		
\f2\i Vegtaaghem
\f0\i0  panaanga iggemkun. \'91A 
\f2\i bumble bee
\f0\i0  stung me on my hand.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 174)	bee (bumble ~)												bumble bee		PE 0v0!ta3 (under PE 0v0!)				vegtaq	vegtxq	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
vegtaasiq	ds[n6cb2	sickle		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 sickle		< vegtagh-(u)siq		CK Rub 126		vegtasiq	vegtxsiq	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
vegtagh-	ds[nf4-	gather grass															to gather grass		< vek-tagh\super 1\nosupersub -				vegtagh-	vegtagh-	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
vek	dsr	grass insulation of the inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		
\f2\i used in the plural,
\f0\i0  veget, 
\f2\i for rag for washing dishes or mop	
\f0\i0 grass	rag rag for washing dishes								mop			grass; grass insulation of the 
\f2\i aagra
\f0\i0 , the inner room of traditional dome-shaped house		PE 0v0!			> vegaaq, veglluk, vegsegaq, vegtagh-, vegtaaq, vewaaq	vek	vek	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1082 \
velaglenga	dskzuks3f	cranberry		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 cranberry		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 125		velaglenga	velaglenga	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1075 \u1083 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \
vewaaq	ds162	grass basket, tray or mat															grass basket, tray or mat		< vek-(ngw/ghw/w)aaq				vewaq	vewxq	\uc0\u1074 \u1099 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
vighvi-	db4db-	annoyed at one\'92s hyperactivity		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  vighvinaghtaq \'91he is annoyingly hyperactive\'92; vighvinaq \'91hyperactive person\'92; vighviyugtuq \'91he is annoyed at someone being hyperactive\'92; vighvikaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  vighviyukaa \'91he is annoyed at her being hyperactive\'92	hyperactivity (annoyed at one\'92s ~)												annoyed at one\'92s hyperactivity						vighvi-	vighvi-	\uc0\u1074 \u1080 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 -\
vullupak	dek]/gfr	hummock		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf.
\f0\i0  vek	bush grass												hummock; bush grass				CK Rub 125		vullupak	vullupak	\uc0\u1074 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
vuu-	d8-	pile up (of ice on the water)		vuuguq \'91the ice is piling up, forming pressure ridges\'92 /	jam (of ice)												to pile up (of ice on the water); to jam (of ice)		PE i&(0)yu-				vu-	vx-	\uc0\u1074 \u1263 -\
vuuneq, vuuleq	d8ys2. d8ks2	pressure ridge		
\f2\i see item 97 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004; = uusleq, vuusleq	piled-up ice	ice jam								sea ice type			pressure ridge; piled-up ice; ice jam		< vuu-neq\super 2\nosupersub , vuu-lleq				vuneq, vuleq	vxneq, vxleq,	\uc0\u1074 \u1263 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 , \u1074 \u1263 \u1083 \u1099 \u1179 \
vuusleq	d8ck]s2	pressure ridge		
\f2\i see item 97 on list in 
\f0\i0 Oozeva et al. 2004; = uusleq, vuuneq	piled-up ice	ice jam								sea ice type			pressure ridge; piled-up ice; ice jam		< vuu-?-lleq				vusleq	vxsleq	\uc0\u1074 \u1263 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \
vuvalla	dedfk]z	ceremony held annually by a family or clan at the time of a new moon involving the offering of choice pieces of meat		
\f2\i Chukotkan;
\f0\i0  = puvalla													ceremony held annually by a family or clan at the time of a new moon involving the offering of choice pieces of meat		PE puva@a				vuvalla	vuvalla	\uc0\u1074 \u1091 \u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \
vuveltu	dedsk]ne	lemming		= puveltu	
\f2\i Lemmus sp.												
\f0\i0 lemming 
\f2\i (Lemmus sp.)		
\f0\i0 PY-S puv0ltu, or from Chukchi w0wcelkal&0n \'91lemmming or vole?\'92 (if this Chukchi word is not in fact borrowed from Eskimo)				vuveltu	vuveltu	\uc0\u1074 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1091 \
vuveq	deds2	walrus skin flooring		
\f2\i usually made from old boat skins; used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 vuuvghek, 
\f2\i for one floor	
\f0\i0 flooring of walrus skin												walrus skin flooring usually made from old boat skins						vuveq	vuveq	\uc0\u1074 \u1091 \u1074 \u1099 \u1179 \
vuvin	dedby	trimming of fur on hat		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R);
\f0\i0  = puvin	ruff on parka hood												ruff on parka hood; fur trimming on hat				CK Rub 125		vuvin	vuvin	\uc0\u1074 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \
waak-	16r-			
\f2\i root;
\f0\i0  > waakaghte-, waakenghillghaghte-, waakigate-, waaknanigh-																			wak-	wxk-	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1082 -\
waakaghsigate-	16rf5cbufns-	inattentive (be ~)			unaware (be ~)												to be inattentive; to be unaware		< waakaghte-igate-				wakaghsigate-	wxkaghsigate-	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
waakaghte-	16rf5ns-	attentive (be ~)															to be attentive		< waak-?-				wakaghte-	wxkaghte-	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
waakenghillghaghte-	16rsy4bk]5f5ns-	startle			surprise	scare											to startle; to surprise; to scare		< waak-?-				wakenghillghaghte-	wxkenghillghaghte-	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
waakigate-	16rbufns-	care (not ~)			respond (not ~)	attention (not pay ~)											to not care; to not respond; to not pay attention		< waak-igate-				wakigate-	wxkigate-	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1082 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
waaknanigh-	16ry]fyb4-	interest (lose ~)			distracted (get ~)	sidetracked (get ~)											to lose interest; to get distracted; to get sidetracked		< waak-nanigh-				waknanigh-	wxknanigh-	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
waame-	16vs-	rush around			hurry for fear of running out of time												to rush around; to hurry for fear of running out of time		PE u9a(t)-				wame-	wxme-	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1084 \u1099 -\
waamsegaq	16vcsu\'832	deception		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 deception	j,vfy	< waame-?		Rub. 563		wamsegaq	wxmsegaq	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1084 \u1089 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u769 \u1179 \
waamte-	16vns-	joke		
\f2\i Waamtamken
\f0\i0 , nayagitunga avangitunga \'91I 
\f2\i was
\f0\i0  
\f2\i fooling
\f0\i0  you, I don\'92t have a sister, I don\'92t have one\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. I:8); = uremte-	kid	tease								fool			to joke; to kid; to tease; to fool		< waame-te\super 1\nosupersub -				wamte-	wxmte-	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1084 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b waapa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 16gf\super s	\nosupersub tow rope for boat		
\f2\i also used in Chukotka	
\f0\i0 rope (tow ~ for boat)												tow rope for boat		probably from English \'91rope\'92	SLI Chuk.	R564		wapae	wxpae	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1087 \u1072 \u1099 \
waari	16hb	wigwam shaped skin tent			tent (wigwam shaped skin tent)	tripodlike structure							check second and  third glosses	trivet used in cooking			wigwam shaped skin tent; tripodlike structure; trivet used in cooking		from Chukchi warel!0n, pl. waret \'91pole of tripod, lower pole in yaranga\'92	14			wari	wxri	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1088 \u1080 \

\f1\b waasa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 16cf\super s	\nosupersub watch (pocket-watch, wristwatch, etc.)		
\f2\i used in the dual, 
\f0\i0 waasek, 
\f2\i for one watch; also used in Chukotka;
\f0\i0  Naaka Ngawenga qepghaghaquq igaghvigmi. Apeghtughaqii taghnughhaat. 8 Marta naaka tuunumaat 
\f2\i waasegneng
\f0\i0  igaghvigmi. \'91My mother Ngawenga works in the school. She teaches the children. On March 8 (\'93woman\'92s day\'94 in Russia) they gave my mother a 
\f2\i watch
\f0\i0  in the school.\'92 (BUKVAR\'92 46)	wristwatch												watch (pocket-watch, wristwatch, etc.)		from English \'91watch\'92	SLI Chuk.	V&E94, R565		wasae	wxsae	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1089 \u1072 \u1099 \
waaypae	16qgfs	net shuttle		
\f2\i also dual,
\f0\i0  waaypek, 
\f2\i for one shuttle	
\f0\i0 shuttle for making a net												net shuttle		from Chukchi wayp0way, pl. wayp0t \'91net shuttle\'92	14			waypae	wxypae	\uc0\u1265 \u257 \u1253 \u1087 \u1072 \u1099 \
wag\'92tiili-	1fun7kb-	leave a place of rest		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to leave a place of rest	e[jlbnm c vtcnf jnls[f	from Chukchi ?	x	Rub. 561		wagtili-	wagtxli-	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1075 \u1090 \u1251 \u1083 \u1080 -\
waghiipae	1f47gf\super s	\nosupersub sewn stripe on a back of coveralls		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 given with a soft sign between gh and ii in Rubtsova; what does the soft sign mean?				sewn stripe on a back of coveralls	dibnfz gjkjcf yf cgbyt rjv,bytpjyf			Rub. 561		waghipae	waghxpae	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1271 \u1251 \u1087 \u1072 \u1099 \
walamnaag-	1fkzvy6u-	file (in order to to sharpen, smooth etc.)															to file						walamnag-	walamnxg-	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1084 \u1085 \u257 \u1075 -\
walamnaak	1fkzvy6r	file (hand tool)			rasp												file; rasp		from Chukchi walamnak \'91to sharpen, whet a knife\'92, walamnakw0n \'91file\'92	14			walamnak	walamnxk	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \u1084 \u1085 \u257 \u1082 \
walenkequn	1fksyrs2ey	thank you		
\f2\i Chukotkan; exclamatory particle													
\f0\i0 thank you		from Chukchi wel0nk0qun \'91thank you\'92				walenkequn	walenkequn	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1085 \u1082 \u1099 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
walenqwekqun	1fksy21sr2ey	at least		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  walenqwekqun tuunlughaa \'91at least he gave him a little piece\'92													at least		from Chukchi ?	x			walenqwekqun	walenqwekqun	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1085 \u1179 \u1265 \u1099 \u1082 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
walguyaak	1fkue9r	snowshoe		walguyaagek \'91pair of snowshoes\'92; Aa, maghyaghqughaqegkanginkut 
\f2\i walguyaagluni
\f0\i0 . \'91Yes, he\'92d lead us going on 
\f2\i snowshoes
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:156)									check for variant walveyaaq (cf. deR. 359)				snowshoe		from Chukchi welw0ye!0t \'91snowshoe\'92	14			walguyak	walguyxk	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
wallu	1fk]/	or maybe		
\f2\i conjunctive particle; 
\f0\i0 Natungutanga puygaaqa unangwaa 
\f2\i wallu
\f0\i0  iignangwaallu. \'91I forgot which one; it could be this one 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  it could be that one.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 175); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  walluumllu	maybe (or ~)												or maybe						wallu	wallu	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
walluumllu	1fk]0vk]/	or maybe		
\f2\i conjunctive particle; 
\f0\i0 Agaankut nagaqughaqanka Saghumigenkugnguq Naaghuluunkuk avaqutaqiit 
\f2\i walluumllu
\f0\i0  naagket maalghuk. \'91I heard about Agaq and his siblings that they were the sons of Saghumik and Naaghuluq, 
\f2\i but possiby
\f0\i0  with two different mothers.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGHAGH. 3:9)	maybe (or ~)												or maybe		< wallu-?-llu				wallumllu	wallxmllu	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u772 \u1084 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
Walqela	!fkk]2skz	Uel\'92kal\'92 in Chukotka (southwest of main Yupik area)		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices; 
\f0\i0 = Welqela													Uel\'92kal\'92 in Chukotka (southwest of main Yupik area)						Walqela	Walqela	\uc0\u1264 \u1072 \u1083 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \
wamelqa	1fvsk]2f	bow (arched anterior) of sled		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 arched anterior bow of a sled		from Chukchi wem0lkal!0n, pl. wem0lket \'91bow of sled\'92	14			wamelqa	wamelqa	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \
wamen'gu	1fvsyue	salamander or similar non-local animal		
\f2\i Chukotkan; possibly specifically the Siberian Salamander
\f0\i0  (Hynobius keyserlingi)	toad	frog											salamander or similar non-local animal (toad, frog)		from Chukchi waamm0n!0n, wam0n!0n \'91frog, newt\'92	14			wamen'gu	wamen'gu	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1084 \u1099 \u1085 \u1075 \u1091 \
wangen\'92gu	1f3syue	shaft bow or rail of dogsled															shaft bow or rail of dogsled		from Chukchi ?	x			wangen\'92gu	wangen\'92gu	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 \u1075 \u1091 \
wangi-	1f3b-	sew		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 to sew		from Chukchi wa&ek \'91sew\'92				wangi-	wangi-	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 -\
wangilqe-	1f3bk]2s-	occupied (be ~ (with))		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 engaged (be ~ (in))												to be occupied (with); to be engaged (in)	pfybvfnmcz xtv-k>			Rub. 564		wangilqe-	wangilqe-	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 -\
wani	1fyb	bell		Lengaaghuunnaqaqa 
\f2\i wani
\f0\i0 . \'91I\'92m going to ring the 
\f2\i bell
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 175)													bell		from Chukchi weniwen, pl. wenit \'91bell\'92	14			wani	wani	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
waniwanllu, waniwanngam	1fyb1fyk]/. 1fyb1fy3fv	not at all		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 not at all						waniwanllu, waniwanngam	waniwanllu, waniwanngam	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 , \u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
wanlegi	1fyksub	more than ever		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 anglimaaten \'91wanlegi you have grown more than ever!\'92; wanlegi anigu ughugllagaa \'91more than ever now the snow is melting\'92; Ugingan 
\f2\i wanlegi
\f0\i0  nuliini qiitghumakanga. \'91Her husband beat his wife 
\f2\i all the more
\f0\i0 .\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 9)													more than ever		from Chukchi wenl0!i \'91unexpectedly; still, meanwhile; notwithstanding\'92				wanlegi	wanlegi	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \
wanlegingam	1fyksub3fv	and yet all the more		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 and yet all the more		< wanlegi=ngam				wanlegingam	wanlegingam	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1085 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1187 \u1072 \u1084 \
wapaaqa	1fg62f	fly-agaric, dried			amanita, dried	opium								marijuana			dried amanita (fly-agaric); opium; marijuana		from Chukchi wapaq, pl. wapaqat \'91fly-agaric\'92	14			wapaqa	wapxqa	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1087 \u257 \u1179 \u1072 \
wapen\'92gu	1fgsyue	disease of animals with tumors and abcesses		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 disease of animals with tumors and abcesses	,jktpym ;bdjnys[. cjghjdj;lf/ofzcz jge[jkm/. yfhsdjv			Rub. 564		wapen\'92gu	wapen\'92gu	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u1075 \u1091 \
waran	1fhfy	at least		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 waran tuunaghtinga \'91at least give me some\'92; waran eslalluwiitaghtaqsaqumi \'91at least it should stop raining once in a while\'92; waran siqinghuughtaghtaqsaqumi \'91at least the sun should come out once in a while\'92; 
\f2\i Waranwha
\f0\i0  avaqutaqelleqamtek. \'91
\f2\i At least
\f0\i0  then, I\'92ll have you two as my children.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 36)													at least		from Chukchi welew \'91at least\'92 or weler, welet \'91although, enough\'92				waran	waran	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1088 \u1072 \u1085 \
wasaq	1fcz2	as I told you (in contrast to what you expected)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  wasaq piiqamken esgha eslallugughhnaqniluku \'91you see I told you that it would rain\'92; wasaq taginaqenghinniiqan, tagiiq \'91you thought he wasn't coming, but he came\'92; wasaq kukriqniiquten ighaghyami, naamigteqrugan pinitun \'91you said you were having a hard time in school, but you completed it well\'92													as I told you (in contrast to what you expected)		from Chukchi wacaq \'91on the other hand, nevertheless\'92				wasaq	wasaq	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
wasi	1fcb	as it turns out		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  wasi tagiightaquq panigan tagistaa \'91she never came before but her daughter made her come over\'92; wasi piyugmeng meghtaqaghaquq ullghitalguluni, maaten ullghitiighulluni piyugmeng meghtaghllak \'91he never went to get water by walking when he had a three-wheeler, but now since he doesn't have his three-wheeler anymore he gets water by walking\'92													as it turns out		from Chukchi wetcin \'91vainly, for nothing\'92				wasi	wasi	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \
wasiwa	1fcb1f	usual (as ~)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  wasiwa uksuqun aqlaghaghllak \'91as usual it will be so cold this winter\'92; wasiwa meeting-elghiit taaqneghllugllaget \'91as usual the meeting won't end for a long time\'92													as usual		< wasi=wa				wasiwa	wasiwa	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1089 \u1080 \u1265 \u1072 \
wata	1fnf	more		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  wata tuuninga \'91give me more!\'92; wata anuqliimakanga \'91it has gotten more windy\'92; wata pituuq tawa \'91it has grown more\'92; piitesiighaat wata nagughllagumaat \'91the flowers have grown more\'92; kiigyaqminigu wata puqlaghtaa \'91it has become warmer now that summer is here\'92	furthermore												more; furthermore		from Chukchi wet0 \'91really, truly, very, at once, continually\'92				wata	wata	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \
wataghllak	1fnf5k]zr	much  more		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0   wataghllak tagilghaasi \'91be sure and come!\'92	be sure and act												much more; be sure and act		< wata-ghllak				wataghllak	wataghllak	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
watapae	1fnfgfs	moss			reindeer moss	
\f2\i Thamnolia vermicularis											
\f0\i0 moss; reindeer moss 
\f2\i (Thamnolia vermicularis)		
\f0\i0 from Chukchi watap, pl. watap0t \'91moss\'92	07, 14			watapae	watapae	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1099 \
wataqaaghaq	1fnf264f2	more (a little ~)		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 a little more		< wata-?-				wataqaghaq	wataqxghaq	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
wawernga-	1f1sh3f-	maul		Yugem panini pii, \'93Uyughaan iigna qikmimeng awiitesqigu 
\f2\i wawerngannaqaanguq
\f0\i0 .\'94 \'91The man said to his daughter, \'93Go tell your brother over there to move away from the dog, it\'92s going to 
\f2\i maul
\f0\i0  him.\'94 (SULUWET 109)	fight (of dog)												to maul; to fight (of dog)						wawernga-	wawernga-	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1265 \u1099 \u1088 \u1187 \u1072 -\

\f1\b waya, wayaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 1fz. 1fz2\super \'a1	\nosupersub wire		Kenghem 
\f2\i wayaa
\f0\i0  laagutaghput. \'91We dug [a trench] for the electric 
\f2\i line
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 83); 
\f2\i also used in Chukotka													
\f0\i0 wire		from English \'91wire\'92	SLI Chuk.	R566		waya, wayaq1	waya, wayaq1	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1103 , \u1265 \u1072 \u1103 \u1179 1\
wayagh-	1fz4-	despoil		Qineghlluni, pimalghii, "Iiwennguq ellmineng 
\f2\i wayaghyaghtughlleqiisi
\f0\i0 ."Arepakim pimakanga, "Tagilinguq 
\f2\i wayaghyaghtughlinkut
\f0\i0 ." \'91Looking in he said, \'93If you don\'92t he will come and 
\f2\i pillage
\f0\i0  you.\'94 Arepaki told him, \'93Tell him that he may come and 
\f2\i pillage
\f0\i0  us.\'94 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 26)	pillage												to despoil; to pillage		PE ivaya3- (under PE iva3-) (?)				wayagh-	wayagh-	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1103 \u1271 -\

\f1\b wayaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 1fz2\'99	slave taken by force from another group			captive												slave taken by force from another group; captive		PE ivaya3- (under PE iva3-) (?)				wayaq2	wayaq2	\uc0\u1265 \u1072 \u1103 \u1179 2\

\f1\b welqa\super e\nosupersub , welqa	
\f0\b0 1sk]2f\super s\nosupersub . 1sk]2f	ash		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 slag	dross							check whether also used on SLI				ash; slag; dross		from Chukchi w0lq0w0l, pl. w0lqet \'91coal\'92	14			welqae, welqa	welqae, welqa	\uc0\u1265 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \u1099 , \u1265 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1072 \
Welqela	!skk]2skz	Uel\'92kal\'92 in Chukotka (southwest of main Yupik area)		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices; 
\f0\i0 = Walqela													Uel\'92kal\'92 in Chukotka (southwest of main Yupik area)						Welqela	Welqela	\uc0\u1264 \u1099 \u1083 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \
weni	1syb	come on		
\f2\i particle; used to encourage action lest an opportunity be lost;
\f0\i0  weni enta ketelta amsanaaluku \'91come on let's go out in the sea while it is still calm\'92; egmiinaq weni, kingunnaqiinkut church-mun \'91hurry up, we're going to be late for church\'92; weni taayughqi tengegkayuget nuughtughlleqaten \'91better hurry up, you might miss the plane\'92	go ahead	do it (better ~)								better do it			come on; go ahead; better do it		from Chukchi w0ne \'91well now, come on\'92				weni	weni	\uc0\u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \
wenigh-	1syb4-	ah (say \'93ah\'94)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 surprised (be ~)												to say \'93ah\'94;  to be surprised	f[fnm. elbdkzncz			CK V & E 145		wenigh-	wenigh-	\uc0\u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
weninquq	1syby2e2	not in the least		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  weninquq tugulleqamken \'91I wouldn't in the least care to marry you!\'92													not in the least		< weni-?-				weninquq	weninquq	\uc0\u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
weniqruk	1syb2ier	I should say not!		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 I should say not!		< weni-qruk				weniqruk	weniqruk	\uc0\u1265 \u1099 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1096 \u1091 \u1082 \
wesqaawi-	1sc261b-	defeated (feel ~)		= wisqaawi	incapable (feel ~)	confidence (lack ~)							check to see if wisqaawi- (cf. deR. 360) is also possible	despair			to feel defeated; to feel incapable; to lack confidence; to lose hope; to despair		from Chukchi w0sqew0k \'91be disappointed\'92	14			wesqawi-	wesqxwi-	\uc0\u1265 \u1099 \u1089 \u1179 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\
wetku	1snre	not until		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  wetku unaami igaghyaghllequnga \'91I won't go to school until tomorrow\'92; wetku atazi kaaskan neghellequkut \'91we'll eat when your father arrives and not until then\'92; piinliitanga wetku movie-m atuumaan liigikaqa esghaqaqeftaqa \'91not until the first part of the movie had been shown did I realize that I'd already seen it\'92; 	only when												not until; only when		from Chukchi w0tku \'91for the first time, only when\'92				wetku	wetku	\uc0\u1265 \u1099 \u1090 \u1082 \u1091 \
wetngaqwa-	1sn3]f21]f-	crack from the cold		Aqlaghaghhneghaniqun mangteghat saaqelghiit miigtaghaqelghiit 
\f2\i wetngaaqwaaqelghiit
\f0\i0  aqlaghami. \'91Whenever it got cold the houses would make a thudding noise and (the earth parts) would
\f2\i  crack
\f0\i0  in the cold.\'92  (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:260); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  wetngegh-													to crack from the cold						wetngaqwa-	wetngaqwa	\uc0\u1265 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1072 \u1179 \u1265 \u1100 \u1072 -\
wetngegh-	1sn3]s4-	burst due to temperature change		wetngeghtuq \'91it cracked or burst\'92 / wengeghtaa \'91it made it crack\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  wetngaqwa-	break due to temperature change	crack due to temperature change											to burst, burst, break or drack, especially due to temperature change (as ice cracking in the winter, or a container that freezes and cracks)						wetngegh-	wetngegh-	\uc0\u1265 \u1099 \u1090 \u1187 \u1100 \u1099 \u1271 -\
wha-	1]f-	here (right ~)		
\f2\i demonstrative adverb base; 
\f0\i0 whani \'91here\'92; whavek \'91to here; 
\f2\i look under
\f0\i0  una, 
\f2\i the corresponding demonstrative pronoun	
\f0\i0 now												right here; now						wha-	wha-	\uc0\u1265 \u1100 \u1072 -\
whaa	1]6			
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 used with interrogative verbs to intensify the questioning		< wha-?				wha	whx	\uc0\u1265 \u1100 \u257 \
whaa maaten	[1f v6nsy	just now		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 right now												just now; right now	djn ntgthm. d lfyysq vjvtyn	< wha + maaten		CK V & E 125, CK	xxxm	wha maten	whx mxten	\uc0\u1093 \u1265 \u1072  \u1084 \u257 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \
whaamik	[16vbr	son (endearing term)															son (endearing term)		< wha(ni)-mik		SLI Cur. Res. Man. 149		whamik	whxmik	\uc0\u1093 \u1265 \u257 \u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \
whaante-	1]6yns-	here (be ~)		whaantuq \'91it is here\'92; Qineghlluni aapsimakanga,   "Nagu Taykegergen?" Taykegergem akisimakanga, "
\f2\i Whaantunga!
\f0\i0 " \'91Peeking in he asked him, \'93Where is Taykegergen?\'94 Taykegergem anwered, \'93I 
\f2\i am here!
\f0\i0 \'94\'92													to be here		< wha(ni)-nte-				whante-	whxnte-	\uc0\u1265 \u1100 \u257 \u1085 \u1090 \u1099 -\
whaawha	1]61]f	at least		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  whaawha tuunaaten mekestaaghhaaghngaan qinunaghqegpenangam \'91at least he has given you some even though it is only a little, so quit fussing\'92; whaawha tuunaqaaten avangiteghngaaghmi \'91at least she gives you something even if she doesn't have much\'92; whaawha latamaaqaaten qepghaghllagmini \'91at least she writes to you even if she is busy\'92; whaawha iteghtuq \'91she keeps coming in\'92; aghnelqusiq tuqlughraghtuq, whaawha tuqlughiiq \'91all day long he kept calling -- he called again and again\'92	better than nothing	again and again											at least; better than nothing; again and again		< wha-wha				whawha	whxwha	\uc0\u1265 \u1100 \u97 \u772 \u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \
whamiigh-	1]fv74-	adopt as one's child		whamiighaa \'91he adopted him, acquired it\'92 / whamiighiiq \'91he adopted a child\'92	acquire												to adopt as one's child; to acquire						whamigh-	whamxgh-	\uc0\u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \u1084 \u1251 \u1271 -\
whang-	1]f3-			
\f2\i personal pronoun base;
\f0\i0  whanga \'91I, me\'92; whangkuta \'91we, us\'92;  whangkutung \'91we\sub 2\nosupersub , us\sub 2\nosupersub \'92; whangkutestun \'91in our language, in our way of doing things\'92; Atanga taghtughtuq. Aapsimakanga, \'93Kinanguzin?\'94 Ukamangaan akisimakanga, \'93
\f2\i Whangangunga
\f0\i0 .\'94 \'91Her father woke up. He asked her, \'93Who are you?\'94 Ukamangaan answered him. \'93I am 
\f2\i me
\f0\i0 \'94. (UNGIPAGHAGH. 6)																			whang-	whang-	\uc0\u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \u1187 -\
whani	1]fyb	here (right ~)		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  whaantuq \'91it is here\'92													right here	djn pltcm	< wha-
\f2\i localis				
\f0\i0 whani	whani	\uc0\u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \
whanikun	1]fybrey	later on		
\f2\i adverbial particle	
\f0\i0 evening (in the ~)												later on; in the evening		< whani-
\f2\i vialis				
\f0\i0 whanikun	whanikun	\uc0\u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
whanistaaghhaq*	1]fybcn65f2	immediately		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 immediately		< whani-staaghhaq				whanistaghhaq*	whanistxghhaq*	\uc0\u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
whaten	1]fnsy	like this		
\f2\i adverbial particle	
\f0\i0 this way												like this; this way		< wha-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 whaten	whaten	\uc0\u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1085 \
whatete-	1]fnsns-	like this (be ~)		whatetuq \'91it is like this\'92 / whatetngwaaghtuq \'91it is exactly like this\'92; whatelnguq \'91one like this\'92	this way (be ~)												to be like this; to be this way		< whaten-?-				whatete-	whatete-	\uc0\u1265 \u1100 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\
wiin	17y	not yet or not now		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  wiin pinaanghitunga \'91I will not go yet\'92; wiin aanefqaavek \'91don't leave yet\'92; wiin aatefqaayek ayapghaataghken \'91don't put on your mittens yet\'92; Mekelghiighhaam nayaggani pimakanga 
\f2\i \'93Wiin
\f0\i0  maani ataasimeng qavaaltung.\'94 \'91The boy told his sister, \'93Let\'92s sleep here one more night 
\f2\i still
\f0\i0 .\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 35)													not yet; not now; still (not changing yet)		from Chukchi wiin \'91just, simply\'92				win	wxn	\uc0\u1265 \u1251 \u1085 \
wiinqun	17y2ey	wait and see		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 not yet												wait and see; not yet		< wiin=qun				winqun	wxnqun	\uc0\u1265 \u1251 \u1085 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
wiintaku, wiintakun	17ynfre. 17ynfrey	not yet		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 wait												not yet; wait		< wiin-?-				wintaku, wintakun	wxntaku, wxntakun	\uc0\u1265 \u1251 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 , \u1265 \u1251 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
wiirqa	17i2f	depressions and bumps in ice and snow		
\f2\i Chukotkan													
\f0\i0 depressions and bumps in ice and snow		from Chukchi werqawer, pl. werqat \'91snow buildup, stones sticking out\'92	14			wirqa	wxrqa	\uc0\u1265 \u1251 \u1096 \u1179 \u1072 \
Wingen	!b3sy	Anadyr in Chukotka (well southwest of the usual Yupik area)		
\f2\i see Map 1 in Appendices;  
\f0\i0 = Uvingen													Anadyr in Chukotka (well southwest of the usual Yupik area)						Wingen	Wingen	\uc0\u1264 \u1080 \u1187 \u1099 \u1085 \
wisqaawi-	1bc261b-	defeated (feel ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E);
\f0\i0  = wesqaawi	incapable (feel ~)	confidence (lack ~)								despair			to feel defeated; to feel incapable; to lack confidence; to lose hope; to despair		from Chukchi w0sqew0k \'91be disappointed\'92	14			wisqawi-	wisqxwi-	\uc0\u1265 \u1080 \u1089 \u1179 \u257 \u1265 \u1080 -\
wu-hu-hu-hu-huu	1e-ue-ue-ue-u8			= gu-gu-gu-gu-guy													a call to the  master of the heavens				CK Rub 128		wu-hu-hu-hu-hu	wu-hu-hu-hu-hx	\uc0\u1265 \u1091 -\u1075 \u1091 -\u1075 \u1091 -\u1075 \u1091 -\u1075 \u1263 \

\f1\b yaag-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 9u-\'a1	crouch															to crouch		PY-S ya!(0)-				yag-1	yxg-1	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1075 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub yaag-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 9u-\super \'99			
\f2\i \nosupersub root;
\f0\i0  > yaagigh-, yaagkestaaghaq, yaagtu-																			yag-2	yxg-2	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1075 -\super 2\

\f1\b \nosupersub yaag-\super 3	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub 9u-\super \'a3			
\f2\i \nosupersub root;
\f0\i0  > yaagneq, yaagtagh-, yaagpagte-, yaagtagh-															PE iya!-				yag-3	yxg-3	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1075 -\super 3\
\nosupersub yaagigh-	9ub4-	remove large pieces to make the contents uniform			chop up	crush											to remove large pieces to make the contents uniform; to chop up; to crush		< yaag\super 2\nosupersub -(ng)igh-		gloss 2, 3 CK Rub 587		yagigh-	yxgigh-	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
yaagkestaaq	9[rscn62	delicate featured thing		yaagkestaaghuuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  yaagkestaaghhaaguq \'91it has small delicate features\'92													thing with small delicate features, patterns or actions		< yaag\super 2\nosupersub -kestaaq				yagkestaq	yxgkestxq	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1093 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
Yaagmelnguq	(uvsk3e2	Yaghmelngak Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 4 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Yaghmelngak Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.		< yaag\super ?\nosupersub -mete\super ?\nosupersub -nguq				Yagmelnguq	Yxgmelnguq	\uc0\u1071 \u772 \u1075 \u1084 \u1099 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
yaagneq	9uys2	length from fingertips of one arm stretched out the side across the chest to bent elbow of other arm stretched in the opposite direction															length from fingertips of one arm stretched out the side across the chest to bent elbow of other arm stretched in the opposite direction		PE iya!n03 (under PE iya!-); < yaag\super \'a3\nosupersub -neq\super 2				\nosupersub yagneq	yxgneq	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
yaagpagte-	9[gf[ns-	dance hard when drummers drum hard		kallagpanghata aghulalghiit yaagpagtaqut \'91when the drummers drum hard, the dancers dance hard\'92													to dance hard when drummers drum hard		< yaag\super \'a3\nosupersub -pagte-		CK A & W 136		yagpagte-	yxgpagte-	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yaagtagh-	9[nf4-	pull hand over hand															to pull hand over hand		< yaag\super \'a3\nosupersub -?-				yagtagh-	yxgtagh-	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yaagtu-	9[ne-	prominent featured thing		yaagtuuq \'91it has large prominent features\'92													to have large prominent features, patterns or actions		< yaag\super 2\nosupersub -tu-				yagtu-	yxgtu-	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 -\
yaakestaaghhaq	9rscn65f2	ight (in pressure) thing		\'85 ilangakun 
\f2\i yaakestaaghhaawaqluni
\f0\i0 , ilangakun qevuutepigtaqluni suupegkayuk. \'91\'85 sometimes it can blow 
\f2\i lightly
\f0\i0 , sometimes strong.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 26); Qenwat mekelghiighhaam 
\f2\i yaakestaaghhaan
\f0\i0  aagullughaa temngi. \'91So the little boy tapped her body 
\f2\i lightly
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3: 204)													light (in pressure) thing						yakestaghhaq	yxkestxghhaq	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1082 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
yaamgat	9vufn	water plant of some sort		
\f2\i Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined; this is a plural	
\f0\i0 algae												water plant of some sort; algae				gloss 2: CK Rub 591		yamgat	yxmgat	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1084 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \
yaan	9y	yardarm, upper, of sail		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); 
\f0\i0 yaatet \'91yardarms\'92									check length of a				upper yardarm for a sail	dth[ytt lhtdrj e gfhecf	yaan is a back formation from inflected forms such as the plural \'91yaatet\'92; from English \'91yard\'92	Chuk.	Rub. 591		yan	yxn	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1085 \
yaave-	9ds-	row		yaavuq \'91he rowed\'92; yaavaa \'91he rowed across it\'92 /													to row		PY yav0-				yave-	yxve-	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1074 \u1099 -\
yaavghagh-	9d4f4-	row (continue to ~)															to continue to row		< yaave-?-				yavghagh-	yxvghagh-	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1074 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yaavuqugh-	9de2e4-	row (continue to ~)															to continue to row		< yaave-?-ugh-				yavuqugh-	yxvuqugh-	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1074 \u1091 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
yaavuquun	9de28y 	oar															oar		< yaavuqugh-(u)n				yavuqun	yxvuqxn	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1074 \u1091 \u1179 \u1263 \u1085 \
yaavutaq	9denf2	stretcher of whale rib used in pairs to stretch walrus skin on boat															stretcher of whale rib used in pairs to stretch walrus skin on boat		< yaave-(u)taq (?)				yavutaq	yxvutaq	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1074 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
yaawaati	916nb	sled, large, pulled by reindeer		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  yaawaatik, 
\f2\i for one sled									
\f0\i0 in Chukchi too? check;  in Rub 592, it is light, not large				large sled pulled by reindeer		from Alutor uyatik	14			yawati	yxwxti	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u257 \u1090 \u1080 \
yaawagh-	91f4-	add oil to fire to make it burn better															to add oil to fire to make it burn better						yawagh-	yxwagh-	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1265 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yaayasi-	9zcb-	waste		yaayasiiq \'91he is wasting something\'92, \'91he is mischievous\'92 / yaayasitkaa \'91he is wasting it\'92; Qerngughteggu tamaana neghumangilkangat, 
\f2\i yaayasitkegpenaan
\f0\i0 . \'91Gather what they didn\'92t eat; don\'92t 
\f2\i waste
\f0\i0  it.\'92 (John 6.12)	mischievous (be ~)	take things for granted											to waste; to be mischievous; to take things for granted						yayasi-	yxyasi-	\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1103 \u1089 \u1080 -\
yagarina	zufhbyf	stick with loop on one end and sharp iron head on the other (used as a brake) to control a dog-sled			brake for dog sled								check exact pronunciation, yagrina, yagaarina, yagharina ???				stick with loop on one end and sharp iron head on the other (used as a brake) to control a dog-sled	jcnjk \'f8gfkrf c htvtyyjq gtnktq yf jlyjv rjywt lkz herb b jcnhsv ;tktpysv yfrjytxybrjv - yf lheujv lkz eghfdktybz yfhnjq ghb tplt yf cj,frf[\uc0\u960 	from Chukchi yaw\'92arena& \'91sled brake\'92	14	Rub. 587, deR. 360		yagarina	yagarina	\u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1088 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \
yaghaghaghte-	z4f4f5ns-	disjointed (become ~ by being bent too far in the wrong direction (of person or animal or its limb))															to become disjointed by being bent too far in the wrong direction (of person or animal or its limb)						yaghaghaghte-	yaghaghaghte-	\uc0\u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yaghlegi	z4ksub	instead		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Ukamangaan araghtuq, "Kayngengunghitunga, aghnaghhaguunga!" 
\f2\i Yaghlegi
\f0\i0  mulaaghtuq kayngestun. \'91Ukamangaan cried out, \'93I am not a bear, I am a girl.\'94 
\f2\i Yet
\f0\i0  she roared like a bear.\'92
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 4); = yeghlegi	but	yet								contrary to expectation			instead; but; yet; contrary to expectation		from Chukchi y\'92el0!i \'91on the contrary\'92				yaghlegi	yaghlegi	\uc0\u1103 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \
yaghlegillu	z4ksubk]/	also no		
\f2\i particle	
\f0\i0 contrary (on the ~)												also no; on the contrary		< yaghlegi=llu				yaghlegillu	yaghlegillu	\uc0\u1103 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \
yaghrantate-	z4hfynfns-	increase			love more	pay more attention											to increase; to love more; to pay more attention		from Chukchi y\'92arat, ya\'92rat \'91very much, greatly\'92	14			yaghrantate-	yaghrantate-	\uc0\u1103 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1085 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yaghripa	z4hbgf	wood drill		yaghripegnekun ukiqughyaghqaq igarutaaghteghumaat \'91they drilled holes with the wood drill\'92	drill used for wood												drill used for wood		from Chukchi ?	x	CK A & W 136		yaghripa	yaghripa	\uc0\u1103 \u1271 \u1088 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \
yagtaghagh-	z[nf4f4-	fly low (of birds)			crouch												to fly low (of birds); to crouch (of people)		< yaag\super 1\nosupersub -?-				yagtaghagh-	yagtaghagh-	\uc0\u1103 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yakeregtagh-	zrshs[nf4-	speak quietly			whisper												to speak quietly; to whisper				CK Rub 590 CK		yakeregtagh-	yakeregtagh-	\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yakiisghaqi-	zr7c5f2b-	beat everyone in a competition		basketball-elghiit ingluteng yakiisghaqiit \'91in the basketball game, they beat their opponents big time\'92													to beat everyone in a competition				CK A & W 136		yakisghaqi-	yakxsghaqi-	\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \u1251 \u1089 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \u1080 -\
yakugh-	zre4-	danger (in ~)		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  yakughnaghtuq \'91it is dangerous\'92; yakughyugtuq \'91he is fearful of danger\'92; yakuqaa \'91he is fearful of its danger\'92; 
\f2\i Yakughyugpenanga
\f0\i0  pugimameng aghvightunga inglunganun. \'91Without 
\f2\i being fearful
\f0\i0  I crossed to its opposite side by swimming.\'92 (SULUWET 47)	fearful of danger												in danger; fearful of danger		PE i&a!- (?)				yakugh-	yakugh-	\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 -\
yakughniigh-	zre4y74-	travel in a risky or dangerous area or conditions		piyaa kellini yakughniighluni kagimleghwaaghmi pegnem quutmun uugsimalghii \'91the hunter on the sea ice was traveling in a dangerous area where it (the ice) was crumbly, and he barely reached land\'92													to travel in a risky or dangerous area or conditions		< yakugh-niigh-		CK A & W 137		yakughnigh-	yakughnxgh-	\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\
yakughte-	zre5ns-	careful, quiet and cautious (be ~)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  yakugh-; Nefkaghaqut 
\f2\i yakughtepiglluteng
\f0\i0 . \'91They watch for seals at theri blow holes very 
\f2\i quietly
\f0\i0 .\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 116)													to be careful, quiet and cautious		PE i&a!- (?)				yakughte-	yakughte-	\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yakughute-	zre4ens-	respect religous mourning over a person\'92s death		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to respect religous mourning over a person\'92s death		< yakughte-?-		CK Rub 589		yakughute-	yakughute-	\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yakumangigh-	zrevf3b4-	correct oneself		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R); cf.
\f0\i0  yakugh-													to correct oneself				CK Rub 590		yakumangigh-	yakumangigh-	\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
yakumangilnguq*	zrevf3bk3e2	careless person (with regard to his actions)															careless person (with regard to his actions)		< yakugh-?-(ng)ite-nguq		CK A & W 137		yakumangilnguq*	yakumangilnguq*	\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1083 \u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
yakungigh-	zre3b4-	raise the voice		aleghqulgun nallunatun yakungightuq \'91the interlocutor is yelling senselessly\'92; temngiraaghinaq yakungighaquq \'91he is pretending to be unafraid of anything\'92	pretend to be unafraid												to raise the voice; to pretend to be unafraid				CK Rub 590		yakungigh-	yakungigh-	\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
yakuqe-	zre2s-	be careful			be quiet												to be careful; to be quiet				CK Rub 589 CK		yakuqe-	yakuqe-	\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 -\
yakuqigate-	zre2bufns-	careless (be ~)			boisterous (be ~)												to be careless; to be boisterous		< yakugh-ke\super 2\nosupersub -(ng)igate-				yakuqigate-	yakuqigate-	\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \u1091 \u1179 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yamrra-	zvif-	announce one\'92s accomplishments		
\f2\i does not have the negative connotation of \'91bragging\'92; 
\f0\i0 yamrraaq \'91he is telling or showing what he has accomplished\'92; yamrraa \'91he is telling or showing her what he has accomplished\'92 / yamrratkaa \'91he is tell about it or showing it (the thing he has accomplished)\'92													to announce one\'92s accomplishments						yamrra-	yamrra-	\uc0\u1103 \u1084 \u1096 \u1072 -\
yanga	z3f	hole covered by patch in hide roof of house															hole covered by patch in hide roof of house						yanga	yanga	\uc0\u1103 \u1187 \u1072 \
yanutqu-	zyen2e-	interrrupt other\'92s talking															to interrrupt other\'92s talking		from Chukchi yanotqok \'91interrupt in conversation\'92	14			yanutqu-	yanutqu-	\uc0\u1103 \u1085 \u1091 \u1090 \u1179 \u1091 -\

\f1\b yapela\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub zgskzs	lowly person			pawn in checkers	low player in game											person of low status; pawn in checkers; low player in a game		from Chukchi ?	x			yapelae	yapelae	\uc0\u1103 \u1087 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
yapuyengi-	zgeqs3b-	do something different to alter the usual routine		qikmiq petugtaaq ilemutaa yapuyengisqelluku \'91he let the dog loose, so it can do things it doesn\'92t normally do when tied\'92													to do something different to alter the usual routine				CK A & W 137		yapuyengi-	yapuyengi-	\uc0\u1103 \u1087 \u1091 \u1253 \u1099 \u1187 \u1080 -\
yaqellengataq	z2sk]s3fnf2	butterfly			toggle, butterfly-shaped												butterfly; butterfly-shaped toggle		PE caq0l0kita3 and caq0l&ataq				yaqellengataq	yaqellengataq	\uc0\u1103 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1187 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
yaqghighagh-	z25b4f4-	hit or hurt on the wing		yaqghighaghtuq \'91it got hit on its wing\'92; yaqghighaghaa \'91he hit it on its wing\'92 /													to hit or hurt on the wing		< yaquq-(ng)igh-?-				yaqghighagh-	yaqghighagh-	\uc0\u1103 \u1179 \u1203 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yaqghighaq	z25b4f2	broken wing															broken wing		< yaquq-(ng)igh-aq				yaqghighaq	yaqghighaq	\uc0\u1103 \u1179 \u1203 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
yaqii-	z27-	move with the wings		yaqiiguq \'91it winged its way through the air \'91/	wings (move with the ~)												to move with wings; to wing		PE iyaqqi- (under iya!-); < yaquq-?-				yaqi-	yaqx-	\uc0\u1103 \u1179 \u1251 -\
yaqiiraq	z27hf2	scraper for skin, wooden handled		
\f2\i used in the dual,
\f0\i0  yaqiirak, 
\f2\i for one scraper													
\f0\i0 wooden handle of a skin scraper		< yaqii-?				yaqiraq	yaqxraq	\uc0\u1103 \u1179 \u1251 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
Yaqughmii(t)	Z2e4vb\'f8n\uc0\u960 	clan (a particular ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)													
\f0\i0 a particular clan				CK V & E 76	xxxt	Yaqughmi(t)	Yaqughmx(t)	\uc0\u1071 \u1179 \u1091 \u1271 \u1084 \u1080 (\u1090 )\
yaquke-	z2ers-	rough (be ~ with)															to be rough with						yaquke-	yaquke-	\uc0\u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1082 \u1099 -\
yaqulek	z2eksr	angel		
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91one with wings\'92; 
\f2\i used in Bible translation; 
\f0\i0  akuzikayuguyaghngaaghma yugetlu 
\f2\i yaqulgetlu
\f0\i0  akuzillghistun, \'85. \'91Though I speak with the tongues of men and of 
\f2\i angels
\f0\i0 , \'85.\'92 (1 Corinthians 13.1)													angel		< yaquq-lek				yaqulek	yaqulek	\uc0\u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
yaquq	z2e2	wing		yaqghwani \'91on its wing\'92													wing		PE iyaqu3 (under PE iya!-)				yaquq	yaquq	\uc0\u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
yaquqegsagh-	z2e2s[cz4-	flap wings before taking off in flight		yaquqegsaghtuq \'91it is flapping its wings preparatory to flight\'92 /													to flap wings before taking off in flight		< yaquq-?-				yaquqegsagh-	yaquqegsagh-	\uc0\u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
yaresa	zhscz	rice															rice		from English \'91rice\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 161		yaresa	yaresa	\uc0\u1103 \u1088 \u1099 \u1089 \u1103 \
Yarga	(huf	site on south shore of Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka		
\f2\i see Map 3 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 site on south shore of Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka						Yarga	Yarga	\uc0\u1071 \u772 \u1088 \u1075 \u1072 \
yataaghqe-	zn652s-	prepare		yataaghquq \'91he got ready\'92; yataaghqaa \'91he got it or her ready\'92 / yataaghqutaa \'91he got ready for it\'92; yataaghqegkaq \'91something that is ready for use\'92; yataaghqumaaq \'91he has gotten ready\'92; yataaghqenneghmeng taaqluni \'85 \'91when he finished getting ready \'85; \'92	get ready												to prepare; to get ready		from Chukchi yet\'92a, yet\'92a& \'91in readiness\'92	14			yataghqe-	yatxghqe-	\uc0\u1103 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
yataang	zn63	ready		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  yataang ayuqunga \'91I am ready\'92	prepared	equipped											ready; prepared; equipped		from Chukchi yet\'92a, yet\'92a& \'91in readiness\'92				yatang	yatxng	\uc0\u1103 \u1090 \u257 \u1187 \
yavlu	zdk/	sweetheart		= lavyu													sweetheart		from English \'91love you\'92	SLI			yavlu	yavlu	\uc0\u1103 \u1074 \u1083 \u1102 \
yayiiqa	zq72f	rough-legged hawk			hawk, rough-legged	
\f2\i Buteo lagopus											
\f0\i0 rough-legged hawk (Buteo lagopus)						yayiqa	yayxqa	\uc0\u1103 \u1253 \u1251 \u1179 \u1072 \
yayuugg	zq8[	should go well		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  kina kayalqiinaqelleqa, yayuug! \'91I wonder who will win, good luck!\'92	good luck												should go well; good luck				CK A & W 137		yayugg	yayxgg	\uc0\u1103 \u1253 \u1263 \u1093 \
yaywaalae	zq16kzs	orphan		= yaywaali									check to make sure that this form with final a is legitimate				orphan		from Chukchi yeywel \'91orphan\'92	14	deR. 360		yaywalae	yaywxlae	\uc0\u1103 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \u1083 \u1103 \u1099 \
yaywaali	zq16kb	orphan		Taakughnguq nengyuqutalghiik 
\f2\i yaywaalingiighhaankuk
\f0\i0 , aatgha Saymegerngen, eltughaghaa taana. \'91They were, it is said, a grandmother and her little 
\f2\i orphan
\f0\i0  grandchild, his name was Saymegerngen, that grandchild of hers.\'92 (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:12); = yaywaala\super e													\nosupersub orphan		from Chukchi yeywel \'91orphan\'92	14			yaywali	yaywxli	\uc0\u1103 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \u1083 \u1080 \
Yaywaalingiighhaq	Zq16kb375f2	hill with VABM \'93Negro\'94 on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 hill with VABM \'93Negro\'94 on St. Lawrence Is.		< yaywaali-ngiighhaq				Yaywalingighhaq	Yaywxlingxghhaq	\uc0\u1071 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \u1083 \u1080 \u1187 \u1251 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
yaywaasae	zq16czs	danger (one who has safely escaped ~)			escapee from danger												one who has safely escaped danger		from Chukchi yayvaset0 \'91pitifully, mournfully\'92	14			yaywasae	yaywxsae	\uc0\u1103 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \u1089 \u1103 \u1099 \
yaywaaseng	zq16cs3	usual (as ~)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Tawaten qamaglluta 
\f2\i yaywaaseng
\f0\i0  uuglleghaatukut quutmun. \'91And we all got 
\f2\i safely
\f0\i0  up onto the shore.\'92 (Acts 27.44)	understandably	expected (as ~)											safely		from Chukchi yayvaset0 \'91pitifully, mournfully\'92				yaywaseng	yaywxseng	\uc0\u1103 \u1253 \u1265 \u257 \u1089 \u1099 \u1187 \
yeghlegi	qs4ksub	instead		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  yeghlegi alla tagitaa \'91instead he brought something else\'92; = yaghlegi	but	yet								contrary to expectation			instead; but; yet; contrary to expectation		from Chukchi y\'92el0!i \'91on the contrary\'92				yeghlegi	yeghlegi	\uc0\u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1083 \u1099 \u1075 \u1080 \
yeghrat	qs4hfn	too much (even for them to do)		
\f2\i particle; 
\f0\i0 Tamaani laluramkem neqanga piyaqnalghii, taaghtami 
\f2\i yeghrat
\f0\i0 . \'91At that time white man\'92s food was hard to come by, hard
\f2\i even for
\f0\i0  the doctor.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:106); Kiyang aatghet 
\f2\i yeghrat
\f0\i0  taakeghllalghlit takelliluki ateliitkayugiit. \'91Sometimes the names would be so long 
\f2\i even for them
\f0\i0  that they give them shorter versions of them.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:184); "Wetku quyngighsi avegluku tagivaqufsigu taawa unguvaghlleqaqa." Pimakangat, "
\f2\i Yeghrat
\f0\i0  tawaatesigatut alignaghngaaghmeng!" \'91\'93Only if you give me half the reindeer, then I\'92ll bring it back to life.\'94 They told him, \'93That\'92s 
\f2\i too much to do, even for
\f0\i0  shamans.\'94\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 103); 	much (very ~)												too much (even for them to do); very much		from Chukchi y\'92arat \'91very, highly, too much\'92				yeghrat	yeghrat	\uc0\u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1088 \u1072 \u1090 \
yeghyiqe-, yeghyake-	qs4qb2s-. qs4mzrs-	aversion to certain foods (feel an ~)		yeghyiquq \'91he feels averse to eating certain foods\'92 / yeghyiqutkaa \'91he feels averse to eating it\'92													to feel an aversion to certain foods						yeghyiqe-, yeghyake-	yeghyiqe-, yeghyake-	\uc0\u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1253 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -, \u1253 \u1099 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \u1099 -\
yelaargae	qsk9hufs	blue fox		
\f2\i Chukotkan	
\f0\i0 fox, blue	
\f2\i Vulpes fulva var.											
\f0\i0 blue fox (Vulpes fulva var.)		from Chukchi yel\'92ar!en \'91grey fox\'92	04, 14			yelargae	yelxrgae	\uc0\u1253 \u1099 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1088 \u1075 \u1072 \u1099 \
yeqay	qs2fq	let\'92s do it		
\f2\i particle;
\f0\i0  Tawaten kiyaghteghngaagmek anipam meteghlluk pimakanga, "
\f2\i Yeqay
\f0\i0  igaqraghwaaghuteltung, pinighnaghsaateltung .\'94 \'91As they were living like that the owl said to the raven, 
\f2\i \'93Let\'92s go ahead
\f0\i0  and decorate each other, make each other nice.\'94 \'91 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:222)													let's do it		from Chukchi y0qqey \'91really, sure, better\'92				yeqay	yeqay	\uc0\u1253 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \
yeqayngan	qs2fq3fy	not again		
\f2\i particle													
\f0\i0 not again		< yeqay-?-				yeqayngan	yeqayngan	\uc0\u1253 \u1099 \u1179 \u1072 \u1253 \u1187 \u1072 \u1085 \
yiillgagh-	q7k][f4-	act suddenly or unexpectedly			leave suddenly or unexpectedly												to act (especially to leave) suddenly or unexpectedly						yillgagh-	yxllgagh-	\uc0\u1253 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yiillgi-	q7k][b-	gossip		yiillgiiq \'91he's gossiping\'92; yiillgii \'91he's gossiping about her\'92 / Entaqun whaten piiqii, "Taana yuuk yiillgiyaqunaan, tusaqegkayuguftuq whaa.\'94 \'91Maybe he told them, \'93Be sure not to talk about him behind his back as he might be able to understand.\'94\'92	talk about behind one\'92s back (or in a way that the target is expected not to understand)												to gossip; to talk about behind one\'92s back (or in a way that the target is expected not to understand)						yillgi-	yxllgi-	\uc0\u1253 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1080 -\
yiista	q7cnf	yeast			loaf of bread	bread loaf											yeast; loaf of bread		from English \'91yeast\'92	SLI	SLI Cur. Res. Man. 161		yista	yxsta	\uc0\u1253 \u1251 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
yilghaaghtaq	qbk465nf2	walrus sleeping while swimming		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)									
\f0\i0 check this				walrus sleeping while swimming	cgzobq yf gkfde vjh;			Rub. 186		yilghaghtaq	yilghxghtaq	\uc0\u1253 \u1080 \u1083 \u1271 \u257 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
yimi-	qbvb-	shy		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  yimiyugtuq \'91he feels shy, intimidated\'92; yiminaghtuq \'91he is intimidating\'92; yimikaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  yimiyukaa \'91he feels intimidated by him\'92; yimitaghtuq \'91he is shy by nature\'92; = yumi-	intimidated	cowering											shy; intimidated; cowering						yimi-	yimi-	\uc0\u1253 \u1080 \u1084 \u1080 -\
yite-	qbns-	advise against doing something		Iitek 
\f2\i yitaghyaghaqa
\f0\i0  umiilgataghaaghtekaalghiinga tamaani. \'85 Seghleghhalek tugunaqiinkut taawa, 
\f2\i yitaataghyaghaqa
\f0\i0 . \'91In as much as I had been promoted to mate (assistant to the captain), I tried to 
\f2\i talk him out of it
\f0\i0 . \'85 Once again I tried to 
\f2\i discourage
\f0\i0  him because I thought they might seize us.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:146)	warn												to advise against doing something; to warn						yite-	yite-	\uc0\u1253 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yu(u)k	/r -- 0r	person		
\f2\i base is
\f0\i0  yug- 
\f2\i (however
\f0\i0  yuuk 
\f2\i one person or one man, or all mankind)
\f0\i0 ; yuget \'91people\'92; yugllak \'91big person\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  sullevneq; 
\f2\i the dual and plural are used in forming the Yupik numerals from forty on: 
\f0\i0 yugek maalghuk \'91forty\'92 (
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91two twenties\'92); yugek ataasiq \'91forty one\'92 (
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91two twenties (plus) one\'92), yuget pingayut \'91sixty\'92 (
\f2\i literally, 
\f0\i0 \'91three twenties\'92)	man (male person)	crewman								mankind			person; man (male person); mankind; crewman		PE i&u!			xxxk xxxu	yu(u)k	yxk	\uc0\u1102 \u1082  -- \u1102 \u772 \u1082 \

\f1\b yugaaq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub /u62\super \'a1	\nosupersub powerful person			important person												powerful person; important person		< yu(u)k-?-				yugaq1	yugxq1	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 1\

\f1\b yugaaq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub /u62\super \'99	\nosupersub tall upright rock		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 rock, tall upright												tall upright rock		< yu(u)k-?		CK Rub 583		yugaq2	yugxq2	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u257 \u1179 2\
yugayu	/uf/	common loon		
\f2\i more generally,
\f0\i0  any loon; = yuwayu	loon, common	
\f2\i Gavia immer											
\f0\i0 common loon (Gavia immer)		from Chukchi yokwayo \'91loon\'92	01, 14			yugayu	yugayu	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1072 \u1102 \
yughagh-	/4f4-	pray		yughaghtuq \'91he is praying\'92 / yughaatkaa \'91he is praying on account of it\'92; 
\f2\i Yughaneghpesini
\f0\i0  piniiyugneghestun pigpenasi. \'91When you 
\f2\i pray
\f0\i0  do not be like the hypocrites.\'92 (MATT. 6:5)	worship												to pray; to worship		PY-S yu3$a3-				yughagh-	yughagh-	\uc0\u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yughaghta	/4f5nf	minister			preacher	clergyman											minister; preacher; clergyman		< yughagh-(s)ta				yughaghta	yughaghta	\uc0\u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \
yughaghvik	/4f4dbr	church															church		< yughagh-vik				yughaghvik	yughaghvik	\uc0\u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 \u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \
yughqutaq	/52enf2	blade of grass			grass, blade												blade of grass						yughqutaq	yughqutaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1203 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
yugilgaghllak	/ubkuf5k]zr	barren old female bearded seal		
\f2\i Chukotkan	Erignathus barbatus 
\f0\i0 (bearded seal) old barren female												old barren female bearded seal 
\f2\i (Erignathus barbatus)						
\f0\i0 yugilgaghllak	yugilgaghllak	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1080 \u1083 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1082 \
yuginaq	/ubyf2	twenty		
\f2\i though the Yupik numerical system is base 20, the numerals from 40 are expressed with 
\f0\i0 yu(u)k 
\f2\i (q.v.)													
\f0\i0 twenty		PE i&u!inna3 (under i&u!); < yu(u)k-inaq				yuginaq	yuginaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
yugniite-	/uy7ns-	homely (be ~)															to be homely		< yu(u)k-?-				yugnite-	yugnxte-	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yugpagaghaq*	/[gfuf4f2	dwarf (legendary)															dwarf (legendary)		< yu(u)k-ghpak-?-ghaq				yugpagaghaq*	yugpagaghaq*	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
yugpak	/[gfr	elderly man			big person	important person											elderly man; big person; important person		< yu(u)k-ghpak				yugpak	yugpak	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
yugpallaghte-	/[gfk]z5ns-	old (get ~)															to get old		< yugpak-?-				yugpallaghte-	yugpallaghte-	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yugrukutaaq	/uheren62	giant			huge man												giant; huge man		< yu(u)k -ghrukutaaq				yugrukutaq	yugrukutxq	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b yugsange-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub /[cz3s-\super \'a1	\nosupersub aware of someone's presence (become ~)		yugsanguq \'91he became aware that someone was present\'92 /													to become aware of someone's presence		< yu(u)k-?-nge-				yugsange-1	yugsange-1	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1099 -\super 1\

\f1\b \nosupersub yugsange-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub /[cz3s-\super \'99	\nosupersub lift up the head		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to lift up the head		< yu(u)k-?		CK Rub 586		yugsange-2	yugsange-2	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1089 \u1103 \u1187 \u1099 -\super 2\
\nosupersub yugsughagh-	/[c/4f4-	look around		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R, V&E)													
\f0\i0 to look around	jukzlsdfncz			CK V & E 166; Rub 586 CK		yugsughagh-	yugsughagh-	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1089 \u1102 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yugsugnite-	/[c/uybns-	resemble a man or a person															to resemble a man or a person		< yu(u)k-sugnite-				yugsugnite-	yugsugnite-	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yugtaaneq	/[n6ys2	male bird, fish, or seal		
\f2\i Yugtaanghunghata
\f0\i0  qaanghitgun kuyngelighaqiit. \'91If they [the caught polar bears] were 
\f2\i males
\f0\i0  they [the hunters] put smoking pipes in their [the bears\'92] mouths.\'92 (AKIINGQWAGH. 88)	male (state of being ~)												male bird, fish, or seal; state of being male		< yu(u)k-taq\super 2\nosupersub -(ng)u-neq\super 2		\nosupersub SLI JR. DICT. 138 and elsewhere		yugtaneq	yugtxneq	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
yugtaasiq	/[n6cb2	lesbian															lesbian		< yu(u)k-?-(u)siq				yugtasiq	yugtxsiq	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u257 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
yugtagh-	/[nf4-	murder		yugtaghtuq \'91he committed murder\'92; yugtaghaa \'91he murdered him\'92 /													to murder		< yu(u)k-tagh\super 1\nosupersub - (?)				yugtagh-	yugtagh-	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yugtu-	/[ne-	populous (be ~)															to be populous		< yu(u)k-tu-				yugtu-	yugtu-	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 -\
yugtuqayuk	/[ne2f/r	man-eating animal			cannibal												man-eating animal; cannibal		< yu(u)k-tugh\super 1\nosupersub -kayuk				yugtuqayuk	yugtuqayuk	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \
yugtuumalghii	/[n8vfk47	foreigner		
\f2\i Chukotkan (V&E)	
\f0\i0 alien	cannibal							sounds forced, but on second it has something to do with cannibal, long ago, parents could have been warning their children about cannibals				cannibal; foreigner; alien	xe;jt. yt cdjt	< yu(u)k-tugh\super 1\nosupersub -(i/u)ma-lghii		CK V & E 131		yugtumalghi	yugtxmalghi	\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1263 \u1084 \u1072 \u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
yugughte-	/ue5ns-	become a man or a person															to become a man or a person		< yu(u)k-(ng)ughte-				yugughte-	yugughte-	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yugughtekaq	/ue5nsrf2	middle-aged man															middle-aged man		< yugughte-(g)kaq				yugughtekaq	yugughtekaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
yuguligh-	/uekb4-	save		
\f2\i used in the translation of the Bible and other religious work; 
\f0\i0 yugulilleq \'91salvation\'92													to save		< yu(u)k-(ng)u-ligh-				yuguligh-	yuguligh-	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
Yugulighista	?uekb4bcnf	Saviour		
\f2\i in Bible translation													
\f0\i0 the Saviour		< yuguligh-i-(s)ta				Yugulighista	Yugulighista	\uc0\u1070 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1080 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \
yugulluk	/uek]/r	sickly person															sickly person		< yu(u)k-(ng)u-lluk				yugulluk	yugulluk	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
yuguma-	/uevf-	alive (be or stay ~)															to be or stay alive		< yu(u)k-(ng)u-(i/u)ma-				yuguma-	yuguma-	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 -\
yugunqegtaq	/uey2s[nf2	healthy person															healthy person		< yu(u)k-(ng)u-nqegtaq				yugunqegtaq	yugunqegtaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
yugunqegte-, yugunqegsi-	/uey2s[ns-. /uey2s[cb-	healthy (be ~)															to be healthy		< yu(u)k-(ng)u-nqegte-				yugunqegte-, yugunqegsi-	yugunqegte-, yugunqegsi-	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -, \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 -\
yugunqgusiq, yuguntqgusiq	/uey2uecb2. /ueyn2uecb2	health (something that insures or contributes to ~)		
\f2\i this word has a three- or even four-consonant cluster, which is very uncommon in the language													
\f0\i0 something that insures or contributes to health		< yugunqegte-(u)siq				yugunqgusiq, yuguntqgusiq	yugunqgusiq, yuguntqgusiq	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1179 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 , \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1090 \u1179 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
yugusiq	/uecb2	corpse			cadaver	dead body (of person or animal)								body of parka minus hood and sleeves			corpse; cadaver; dead body (of person or animal); body of parka minus hood and sleeves		PE i&u!uci3 (under PE i&u!); < yu(u)k-(ng)u-(u)siq				yugusiq	yugusiq	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
yuguyugneq	/ue/uys2	arrogant person															arrogant person		< yu(u)k-u-yug-neq\super 2				\nosupersub yuguyugneq	yuguyugneq	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
yuguyugniqe-	/ue/uyb2s-	arrogant (be ~)															to be arrogant		< yuguyugneq-liqe-				yuguyugniqe-	yuguyugniqe-	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
yugyag-	/umzu-	population increases			new players join a game												for population to increase; for new players to join a game		PE i&u!ya!- (under PE i&u!); < yu(u)k-yag-				yugyag-	yugyag-	\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1100 \u1103 \u1075 -\
yukaghtaq	/rf5nf2	ready-made or store-bought item															ready-made or store-bought item		< yu(u)k-?-				yukaghtaq	yukaghtaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
yukegtaq	/rs[nf2	crewman, good															good crewman		< yu(u)k-kegtaq				yukegtaq	yukegtaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
yuknagh-	/ry]f4-	desirable as a crewman (be ~)															to be desirable as a crewman		< yu(u)k-ke\super 1\nosupersub -nagh-				yuknagh-	yuknagh-	\uc0\u1102 \u1082 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yuksagute-	/rczuens-	take (him) as a crewman															to take (him) as a crewman		< yu(u)k-ksagute-				yuksagute-	yuksagute-	\uc0\u1102 \u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yukumighte-	/revb5ns-	sit cross-legged		yukumightuq \'91he is sitting cross-legged\'92 /													to sit cross-legged						yukumighte-	yukumighte-	\uc0\u1102 \u1082 \u1091 \u1084 \u1080 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yukuta	/renf	dampness			moisture	fog								mist			dampness; moisture; fog; mist		PE iyukuta(3)				yukuta	yukuta	\uc0\u1102 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \
yukutate-	/renfns-	damp (be ~)															to be damp		< yukuta-te\super \'a2\nosupersub -				yukutate-	yukutate-	\uc0\u1102 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yulaaq	/k92	insignificant person			lowly man												insignificant person; lowly man		< yu(u)k-laaq				yulaq	yulxq	\uc0\u1102 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
yulluggaq	/k]/[f2	dear little meek man															dear little meek man		< yu(u)k-lluggaq				yulluggaq	yulluggaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
yulluk	/k]/r	bad man															bad man		< yu(u)k-lluk				yulluk	yulluk	\uc0\u1102 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
yumi-	/vb-	shy		
\f2\i emotional root;
\f0\i0  yumiyugtuq \'91he feels shy, intimidated\'92; yuminaghtuq \'91he is intimidating\'92; yumikaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  yumiyukaa \'91he feels intimidated by him\'92; yumitaghtuq \'91he is shy by nature\'92; = yimi-	intimidated	cowering											shy; intimidated; cowering		PE i&&imi(yu!)- (under PE i&u!-)				yumi-	yumi-	\uc0\u1102 \u1084 \u1080 -\
yumranalu	/vhfyfk/	tinder		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)	
\f0\i0 quick-igniting powder												tinder; quick-igniting powder		from Chukchi ?	x	CK Rub 585		yumranalu	yumranalu	\uc0\u1102 \u1084 \u1088 \u1072 \u1085 \u1072 \u1083 \u1102 \
yungeltaghhaq*, yungestaq*	/3sk]nf5f2. /3scnf2	dwarf (legendary)															dwarf (legendary)		< yu(u)k-?-ghhaq, -ngestaq				yungeltaghhaq*, yungestaq*	yungeltaghhaq*, yungestaq*	\uc0\u1102 \u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 , \u1102 \u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
yungllagh-	/3k]z4-	make (create) a man		yungllaghtuq \'91he produced a man, got a crewman\'92; yungllaghaa \'91he got him as a crewman\'92 /	carve a figure of a man	get a crewman											to make (create) a man; to carve a figure of a man; to get a crewman		< yu(u)k-ngllagh-				yungllagh-	yungllagh-	\uc0\u1102 \u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1271 -\
yupallagh-	/gfk]f4-	aging (be ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to be aging		< yu(u)k-?-		CK Rub 586		yupallagh-	yupallagh-	\uc0\u1102 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
yupallagte-	/gfk]f[ns-	middle-aged person (become a ~)		
\f2\i Chukotkan (R)													
\f0\i0 to become a middle-aged person		< yu(u)k-?		CK Rub 586		yupallagte-	yupallagte-	\uc0\u1102 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yupallatangite-	/gfk]fnf3bns-	empty (be ~ of people)			uninhabited (be ~)												to be empty of people; to be uninhabited		< yu(u)k-?-(ng)ite-				yupallatangite-	yupallatangite-	\uc0\u1102 \u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yupenaaq	/gsy62	lowly man															lowly man		< yu(u)k-penaaq				yupenaq	yupenxq	\uc0\u1102 \u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
Yupigestun	?gbuscney	Yupik (in the ~ language)		
\f2\i adverbial particle 													
\f0\i0 in the Yupik language		< Yupik-
\f2\i equalis				
\f0\i0 Yupigestun	Yupigestun	\uc0\u1070 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1091 \u1085 \
Yupigti-	?gb[nb-	speak Yupik		yupigtiiq \'91he is speaking Yupik\'92; Yupigtitaa \'91he is speaking Yupik to her\'92; 
\f2\i many speakers prefer
\f0\i0  akuzipig- 
\f2\i instead for this meaning	
\f0\i0 Yupik (speak ~)												to speak Yupik		< Yupik-ti-				Yupigti-	Yupigti-	\uc0\u1070 \u1087 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1080 -\
Yupik	?gbr	St. Lawrence Island / Siberian Eskimo			Eskimo, St. Lawrence Island / Siberian	honest upright person											St. Lawrence Island / Siberian Eskimo; honest upright person		< yu(u)k-pik				Yupik	Yupik	\uc0\u1070 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
yuqaq	/2f2	adult		(?)									check this; can\'92t find any examples in texts				adult		< yu<u>k-?		from VK\'92s notes		yuqaq	yuqaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
yuqeghte-	/2s5ns-	go outside  briefly to check weather, etc.		yuqeghtuq \'91he stepped out\'92 / Qenwatlu alla 
\f2\i yuqeghsalghiimi
\f0\i0 , kii, kavighhalaak keneghllak uka unegken. \'91The next time he
\f2\i  ventured out and looked
\f0\i0  toward the sea, he saw a ball of red fire coming  in over the water.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:170)	step out for a minute												to go outside briefly to check weather etc.; to step out for a minute		PY yuqa3- (under PE iyyu3-)				yuqeghte-	yuqeghte-	\uc0\u1102 \u1179 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yuslighaq	/ck]b4f2	grey whale calf			calf of grey whale	
\f2\i Eschrichtius robustus											
\f0\i0 grey whale calf						yuslighaq	yuslighaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
yusqughhaq*	/c2e5f2	dwarf (legendary)															dwarf (legendary)		< yu(u)k-squghhaq				yusqughhaq*, yusqungighhaq	yusqughhaq*, yusqungxghhaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
 yusqungiighhaq	/c2e375f2	dwarf (legendary)															dwarf (legendary)		< yu(u)k-squq-ngiighhaq				yusqughhaq*, yusqungighhaq	yusqughhaq*, yusqungxghhaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1187 \u1251 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
yusquuvgaghhaq	/c28duf5f2	man, very small															very small man		< yu(u)k-squq-?-ghhaq				yusquvgaghhaq	yusqxvgaghhaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1089 \u1179 \u1263 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
Yuughapaatat	)4fg6nfn	Youghapotit Rocks off the southern coast of St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Youghapotit Rocks off the southern coast of St. Lawrence Is.		< yuughapak-(u)taq-
\f2\i plural				
\f0\i0 Yughapatat	Yxghapxtat	\uc0\u1070 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1090 \
Yuughapak	)4fgfr	Sekinak Lagoon (or the spit between it and the ocean) on St. Lawrence Is.		
\f2\i see Map 5 in Appendices													
\f0\i0 Sekinak Lagoon (or the spit between it and the ocean) on St. Lawrence Is.						Yughapak	Yxghapak	\uc0\u1070 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
Yuuk Savilek	)r Czdbksr	constellation of Orion		
\f2\i literally:
\f0\i0  \'91man with a knife\'92	Orion (constellation)												the constellation of Orion		< yu(u)k + savik\super 1\nosupersub -lek			xxxs	Yuk Savilek	Yxk Savilek	\uc0\u1070 \u772 \u1082  \u1057 \u1103 \u1074 \u1080 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
yuuke-	0rs-	embarrassed by praise															to be embarrassed by praise		< yu(u)k-?-				yuke-	yxke-	\uc0\u1102 \u772 \u1082 \u1099 -\
yuukegtaq	0rs[nf2	handsome man															handsome man		< yu(u)k-kegtaq				yukegtaq	yxkegtaq	\uc0\u1102 \u772 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
yuukegte-	0rs[ns-	handsome (be ~)															to be handsome		< yu(u)k-kegte-				yukegte-	yxkegte-	\uc0\u1102 \u772 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
yuungaaghaq*	0364f2	jaeger		meghem yuungaaghaa \'91pomarine jaeger 
\f2\i (Stercorarius pomarinus)\'92
\f0\i0 ; qutem yuungaaghaa \'91long-tailed jaeger 
\f2\i (Stercorarius longicaudus)\'92	Stercorarius spp.												
\f0\i0 jaeger (Stercorarius spp.)		PE iyu&&a3				yungaghaq*	yxngxghaq*	\uc0\u1102 \u772 \u1187 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
yuungigh-	03b4-	reduce in size by folding, rolling and/or tying		yuungightuq \'91he lost weight\'92; yuungighaa \'91he reduced its size\'92 / yuungighiiq \'91he reduced the size of something\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 yu(u)k	lose weight												to reduce in size by folding, rolling and/or tying; to lose weight						yungigh-	yxngigh-	\uc0\u1102 \u772 \u1187 \u1080 \u1271 -\
yuutu-	0ne-	big around the waist (be ~)			stout (be ~ (of a person))												to be big around the waist; be stout (of a person)		PE yugtu- (under PI i&u!); < yu(u)k-tu-				yutu-	yxtu-	\uc0\u1102 \u772 \u1090 \u1091 -\
yuvghiigh-	/d474-	examine		yuvghiightuq \'91he examinied something\'92; yuvghiighaa \'91he examined it\'92 / yuvghiighsightuq \'91he's getting a medical exam\'92	inspect	medically examine											to examine; to inspect; to give a medical examination		PE iyuv3i3-				yuvghigh-	yuvghxgh-	\uc0\u1102 \u1074 \u1271 \u1251 \u1271 -\
yuvghiighyaghqaq	/d474mz52f2	magazine (reading material)		
\f2\i also plural,
\f0\i0  yuvghiighyaghqat, 
\f2\i for one magazine													
\f0\i0 magazine (reading material)		< yuvghiigh-yaghqaq				yuvghighyaghqaq	yuvghxghyaghqaq	\uc0\u1102 \u1074 \u1271 \u1251 \u1271 \u1100 \u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
yuwayu	/1f/	common loon		
\f2\i more generally,
\f0\i0  any loon; = yugayu	loon, common	
\f2\i Gavia immer											
\f0\i0 common loon (Gavia immer)		from Chukchi yokwayo \'91loon\'92	01, 14			yuwayu	yuwayu	\uc0\u1102 \u1265 \u1072 \u1102 \
ziruliin	pbhek7y	lube oil															lube oil		from English \'93Zeroline\'94 (a brandname)	SLI	from SLI Curriculum resource manual		yz	zirulxn	\uc0\u1079 \u1080 \u1088 \u1091 \u1083 \u1251 \u1085 }