{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Oblique;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 Palatino-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 																	
\f1\b\fs72 A									\
																	E							
\f0\b0\fs24 e	e	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 F							
\f0\b0\fs24 f	f	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 G							
\f0\b0\fs24 g	g	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 I							
\f0\b0\fs24 h	h	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 K							
\f0\b0\fs24 k	k	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 L							
\f0\b0\fs24 l	l	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 M							
\f0\b0\fs24 m	m	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 N							
\f0\b0\fs24 n		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 P							
\f0\b0\fs24 p	p	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 Q							
\f0\b0\fs24 q	q	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 R							
\f0\b0\fs24 r	r	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 S							
\f0\b0\fs24 s	s	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 T							
\f0\b0\fs24 t	t	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 U							
\f0\b0\fs24 u		\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 V							
\f0\b0\fs24 v	v	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 W							
\f0\b0\fs24 w	w	\
																	
\f1\b\fs72 Y							
\f0\b0\fs24 y		\
																										\
																										\
~+aatagh-	-6nf4-	repeatedly and persistently V several times		
\f2\i apparently not used with bases that end in a full vowel; 
\f0\i0 iitghaataghtuq \'91it penetrated, went on into something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to enter\'92); kaataaghaghtuq \'91it got through (of sound, smell, news)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); Taakut ilagaatet atugh
\f1\b aatagh
\f0\b0 aqiit, \'85 \'91They\'92d sing these songs 
\f1\b over and over again
\f0\b0 , \'85\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to sing\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:236) 	persistently V several times	finally V											to V finally or repeatedly and persistently, several times		pb PE 3ata3-				~+aatagh-	atagh	xtagh	-\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
+aate-	-6ns-	together (V ~ in one movement)		
\f2\i probably non-productive; 
\f0\i0 ateghaatut \'91they went down together\'92; (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ategh- \'91to go down\'92); iighaatut \'91they are playing hide and seek\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized from
\f0\i0  iigh- \'91to hide\'92); mayughaatut \'91they climbed together\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mayugh- \'91to go up, climb\'92); qateghaatut \'91they jumped as a group\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qategh- \'91to jump\'92)	group (V as a ~ in one movement)												to V together, as a group, in one movement 						+aate-	ate	xte	-\uc0\u257 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b +a\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -fs	
\f2\i Yupicizes English words		
\f0\i0 frog-a \'91frog\'92, frog-et \'91frogs\'92; frog-nguuq \'91it is a frog\'92; computer-a 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  computer-ek \'91computer\'92 
\f2\i (note conventional dual for one thing); 
\f0\i0 John-em aatkii camel-
\f1\b e
\f0\b0 m melqwaneng ulimaaghet. \'91John\'92s garments were made of camel fur.\'92 (Mark 1.6)													
\f2\i allows English words to be used in Yupik						
\f1\i0\b +a\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub a	a	-\uc0\u1072 \u1099 \
+agh-	-f4-	catch N (game)		
\f2\i used with game animal nouns; non-productive (?); 
\f0\i0 ayveghaghtuq \'91he caught a walrus\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayveq \'91walrus\'92); nanughaghtuq \'91he caught a polar bear\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nanuq \'91polar bear\'92)													to catch N (game)						+agh-	agh	agh	-\uc0\u1072 \u1271 -\
-aghagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~+(at)aghagh-													
\f0\b0 to be V-er; to V more; to be more V						~+(at)aghagh-	aghagh	aghagh	\
+aghaghte-	-f4f5ns-	immediately V		
\f2\i evidently used only with vowel-ending bases (?); 
\f0\i0 esleqaghaghtuq \'91it filled immediately\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  esleqe- \'91to be full\'92); estaaghaghtuq \'91it slid for a short time\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  estu- \'91to slide\'92); maniighaghtuq \'91he suddenly ran for protection\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mani- \'91to move closer\'92); piighaghtuq \'91he did or said something quickly, or went quickly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pi- \'91to do, say, go\'92); tagiighaghtuq \'91he came right back\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come\'92)	briefly V	quickly V								suddenly V			to immediately V; to briefly V; to quickly V; to suddenly V		pb PY -a3a3t0-				+aghaghte-	aghaghte	aghaghte	-\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
:aghaq*	-f4f2	young N		
\f2\i non-productive (?); used mainly with animate nouns; 
\f0\i0 naghuyaaghaq \'91baby gull\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naghuyaq \'91gull\'92); kayngaaghaq \'91brown bear cub\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaynga \'91brown bear\'92); nanaaghaq \'91polar bear cub\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nanuq \'91polar bear\'92); yugpagaghaq \'91dwarf\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yugpak \'91big person\'92 (!)); tapghaaghaq \'91razor clam; long thin rope\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tapghaq \'91rope\'92); kukupagaghaq \'91young ribbon seal\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kukupak \'91ribbon seal\'92); ulghaaghaghaq \'91young sea lion\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ulghaaq \'91sea lion\'92); 
\f2\i also possibly in the following (from unidentified bases); 
\f0\i0 panaaghaq \'91toy spear, peg\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pana \'91spear\'92)
\f2\i :
\f0\i0  mesaqaaghaq \'91baby snow bunting\'92; nguuyngaaghaq \'91housefly\'92; sipelaaghaq \'91guillemot\'92; yuungaaghaq \'91jaeger\'92	small N												young N; small N						:aghaq*	aghaq	aghaq	-\uc0\u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
-aghesnagh-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +(a)ghesnagh-													
\f0\b0 to just V; to V just now; to only V (and perhaps in vain)						
\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +(a)ghesnagh-	
\f0\b0 aghesnagh	aghesnagh	\
~+aghtagh-	-f5nf4-	repeatedly V with back and forth movement		pangalgaghtaghtuq \'91it ran back and forth\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pangaleg- \'91to run on four legs\'92); mamlegaghtaghtuq \'91it cast shadows\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mamleg- \'91to be dark\'92); qepghaghaghtaghtuq \'91he worked very busily\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92); talughaghtaghtuq \'91it moved in and out of sight\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  talugh- \'91to move out of sight\'92)	back and forth repeatedly V												to V repeatedly with back and forth movement		pb PE a3-				~+aghtagh-	aghtagh	aghtagh	-\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
~+aghte-	-f5ns-	suddenly V		aavgaghtuq \'91it suddenly split\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aveg- \'91to split\'92); neghyugaghtuq \'91he suddenly wanted to eat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghyug- \'91to want to eat\'92); allngughaghtuq \'91it suddenly dove\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  allngugh- \'91to dive\'92); mayughaghtuq \'91it suddenly rose\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mayugh- \'91to go up\'92); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  -qaghte-													to suddenly V		pb PY -a3a3t0-				~+aghte-	aghte	aghte	-\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
~+aghtugh-	-f5ne4-	repeatedly V		
\f2\i marginally productive or non-productive; 
\f0\i0 iighaghtughtuq \'91he hid from his enemies\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iigh- \'91to hide\'92); iniightughtuq \'91he is hanging things\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ini- \'91to hang to dry\'92); payangitaghtughtuq \'91the Chukotkans are repeatedly visiting\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  payangite- \'91for Chukotkans to visit\'92); peggaghtughtuq \'91he stayed up late\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pegge- \'91to stay awake all night\'92)													to V repeatedly						~+aghtugh-	aghtugh	aghtugh	-\uc0\u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
?aq	-f2	one that has been V-ed		
\f2\i marginally productive if not non-productive;
\f0\i0  tuqutaq \'91a killed thing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqute- \'91to kill\'92); ulimaaq \'91made thing, ivory carving, product\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ulima- \'91to make\'92); aantat \'91dump, midden\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aante- \'91to put out(side))\'92; qiipaq \'91sewing thread\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiipe- \'91to twist\'92); uumgaq \'91small box\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umeg- \'91to close\'92); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  -kaq\super 1													\nosupersub one that has been V-ed		pb PE 9a3				?aq	aq	aq	-\uc0\u1072 \u1179 \
-aqe-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~+(g)aqe-													
\f0\b0 to be currently V-ing; to V now and then (
\f2\i with the subordinative
\f0\i0 ); to always V (
\f2\i with particle
\f0\i0  quunpeng)						~+(g)aqe-	aqe	aqe	\
~+(at)aghagh-	-\'f8fn\uc0\u960 f4f4-	more V		
\f2\i the 
\f0\i0 at 
\f2\i used with all bases except those that end in
\f0\i0  te; umaataghaghtuq \'91it is thicker\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umu- \'91to be thick\'92); taakataghaghtuq \'91it is longer\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taake- \'91to be long\'92); aangataghaghtuq \'91it is bigger\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aange- \'91to be big\'92); pinighataghaghtuq \'91it is better\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pinigh- \'91to be good\'92); uglaghataghaghtut \'91they are more numerous\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uglagh- \'91to be many\'92); sukataghaghtuq \'91it is faster\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sukate- \'91to go or be fast\'92); nighughaghaghtuq \'91it got brighter\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nighughte- \'91to get bright\'92); akingitaghaghtuq \'91it is cheaper\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akingite- \'91to be cheap\'92; 
\f2\i used with a noun in the ablative-modalis case to make comparisons:
\f0\i0  mangteghaqa aangataghaghtuq manghteghaghpeneng \'91my house is bigger than your house\'92; una pinighataghaghtuq taameng \'91this is better than that\'92													to be V-er; to V more; to be more V						~+(at)aghagh-	ataghagh	ataghagh	-(\uc0\u1072 \u1090 )\u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
?ate-	-fns-	lack N		
\f2\i non-productive variant of 
\f0\i0  ~:(ng)ite- 
\f2\i (q.v.); 
\f0\i0 kayaatuq \'91he is weak\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kayu- \'91to be strong\'92)													to lack N						?ate-	ate	ate	-\uc0\u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
%(e)nkuk / %(e)nkut	-\'f8s\uc0\u960 yrer - -\'f8s\u960 yren	partner (N and ~)		
\f2\i concerning the dual
\f0\i0  
\f2\i form,
\f0\i0  -(e)nkuk: 
\f2\i generally used on both nouns of a pair (the second of which may also have the enclitic 
\f0\i0 -llu)
\f2\i ;  
\f0\i0 meteghllugenkut amaankutlu \'91the raven and the wolf\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meteghlluk \'91raven\'92 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  amaa \'91wolf\'92) yuggaankuk mayeraaghpagenkuklu \'91the little man and the giant\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yuggaq* \'91little man\'92 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  mayeraaghpak \'91giant\'92); Taanata ungipaghaq tawatelnguq, Kiyaghneghe
\f1\b nkuk
\f0\b0  Satan-e
\f1\b nkuk
\f0\b0 . \'91That\'92s the story. God 
\f1\b and
\f0\b0  Satan.\'92 (from Kiyaghneq \'91God\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:252); Taana Tutmatelek Aqulage
\f1\b nkuk
\f0\b0  Qaaqwaa
\f1\b nkuk
\f0\b0  avaqutaqaak. \'91That Tutmatelek is the son of Aqulak 
\f1\b and
\f0\b0  Qaaqwaq.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:10); 
\f2\i however, if the postbase 
\f0\i0 -lghiik
\f2\i  is used, the present postbase need not occur on two nouns: 
\f0\i0 Kiyaghsimalghiik yuge
\f1\b nkuk
\f0\b0  nulighqullghiik. \'91There lived a man 
\f1\b and
\f0\b0  wife.\'92 (UNGIPAGHAGH. 113); 
\f2\i concerning the plural form, 
\f0\i0 -(e)nkut: Pata
\f1\b nkut
\f0\b0  esghapagiit. \'91Pata 
\f1\b and his friends 
\f0\b0 watched.\'92 (PIYAA. 13); Pangeghtellemnni tawani Muumetaa
\f1\b nkut 
\f0\b0 taglaataqngamteki tespamavek Ungazimun. \'91When we went to Chukotka at that time we took back Muumetaq 
\f1\b and associates
\f0\b0  there to New Chaplino.\'92 (PANGEGH. 1)	associate(s) (N and ~)	family (N and ~)											N and partner; N and associate(s); N and family		pb PE nkuk				%(e)nkuk / %(e)nkut	enkuk	enkuk	-(\uc0\u1099 )\u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1082  - -(\u1099 )\u1085 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub \'96laghate-	
\f0\b0 -kz4fns-	already (have ~ V-ed together)		itelaghatut \'91they came in together, as a group\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to come in\'92); aanlaghatut \'91they went out together\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92); tagilaghatut \'91they all came\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come\'92); Entaqun apeghiighluteng esgha taam kingunganeng mulugpenateng, qavameggnenguq tuqu
\f1\b laghat
\f0\b0 kaagut. 'I think it was not long afterwards that they had 
\f1\b all
\f0\b0  died in their sleep.' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqu- \'91to die\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:88); Aghnaghaghhaq nayaggiinaat unegtuq, anengii ifla
\f1\b laghat
\f0\b0 ut qamaghlluteng. \'91The little girl, their sister, only she, was left, as her brothers 
\f1\b all
\f0\b0  were lost, all of them.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ifla- \'91to get lost\'92) (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 11); 
\f2\i apparently not used with bases ending in
\f0\i0  te	together (have already V-ed ~)	group (V as a ~)											to have already V-ed together; to V as a group						
\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub \'96laghate-	
\f0\b0 laghate	laghate	-\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96nasiigh-	
\f0\b0 -yfc74-	put off V-ing		teghtughnasiightuq \'91he woke up angry\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  teghtugh- \'91to wake up\'92); neghnasiightuq \'91he put off eating\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); qepghanasiightuq \'91he put off working\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92)	stall at V-ing	angrily V											to put off V-ing; to stall at V-ing; to V angrily		pb PE naci(C)a3- and naca(C)a3-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96nasiigh-	
\f0\b0 nasigh	nasxgh	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neghllug-, @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neghllugte-	
\f0\b0 -ys5k]/u-. -ys5k]/[ns-	wrongly V		pineghllugtuq \'91to be obstinate\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pi- \'91to do, say, act, go\'92); tusaqneghllugtuq \'91he misunderstood\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tusaqe- \'91to hear\'92)	difficulty (V with ~)												to V wrongly or with difficulty		< -neq-ghlluk				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neghllug-, @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neghllugte-	
\f0\b0 neghllug	neghllug	-\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -, -\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neghlluk	
\f0\b0 -ys5k]/r	difficult (something that is ~ to V)		neneghlluk \'91something that is hard to eat; someone who can go for long periods without eating\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); aaghhneghlluk \'91someone who is difficult to convince\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aaghte- \'91to convince\'92); ineghneghlliquq \'91he is disobedient\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ineghte- \'91to admonish\'92, 
\f2\i with the postbase in question followed by 
\f0\i0 -iqe- \'91to be troubled with --\'92)	hard (something that is ~ to V)	hardly (one who ~ needs to V)											something that is difficult or hard to V; one who hardly needs to V		< -neq-ghlluk				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neghlluk	
\f0\b0 neghlluk	neghlluk	-\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neghsigh-	
\f0\b0 -ys5cb4-	wait for (it) to V, be V or to become V		Tawaani kenileghni aghuliighluteng utaqiigaqut siqineq pii
\f1\b nneghsigh
\f0\b0 aqaat. \'91They stopped then and 
\f1\b waited for
\f0\b0  the sun to come up.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  piite- \'91to come up (of sun)\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:206)													to wait for (it) to V; to wait for (it) to be V or to become V						
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neghsigh-	
\f0\b0 neghsigh	neghsigh	-\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neghtu-	
\f0\b0 -ys5ne-	habitually V		yughaneghtuuq \'91he prays often\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yughagh- \'91to pray\'92); nuqenneghtuuq \'91he is a patient person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuqete- \'91to practice self-restraint\'92)	frequently V												to V habitually; to V frequently						
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neghtu-	
\f0\b0 neghtu	neghtu	-\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -ys2\'a1	act of V-ing		qiyaneq \'91the act of crying\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); kumlanneq \'91the state of being cold\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kumlate- \'91to be cold\'92); ikighhneq \'91the act of opening\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ikighte- \'91to open\'92); qavaneq \'91the act of sleeping\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); aveneq \'91the act of dividing in two\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aveg- \'91to divide in two\'92); neneq \'91the act of eating\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); 
\f2\i this postbase keeps 
\f0\i0 e 
\f2\i with \'93short\'94 bases  that end in 
\f0\i0 e
\f2\i   (not preceded by
\f0\i0  t)
\f2\i (i.e. bases of the form
\f0\i0  (C\sub 1\nosupersub )VVC\sub 2\nosupersub e- 
\f2\i where
\f0\i0  C\sub 2\nosupersub  \uc0\u8800  t), 
\f2\i but drops
\f0\i0  e 
\f2\i from longer bases:
\f0\i0  kuuveneq \'91the act of spilling\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill\'92); 
\f2\i this postbase may be used with an ablative-modalis ending together with verbs
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to finish\'92, aghtugh- \'91to not manage\'92, uutgute- \'91to go back\'92, 
\f2\i etc.: 
\f0\i0 neneghmeng taaqluni aanuq \'91having finished (the act of) eating he went out\'92 ; taghnughhaq taaqsan neneghmeng aanunga \'91when the boy finished eating I went out\'92; Ivaamayaqangat naalke
\f1\b nnegh
\f0\b0 meng aghtughaat. \'91They looked for her, but couldn\'92t find her (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , couldn\'92t manage toward her, concerning 
\f1\b the act of 
\f0\b0 finding (her).\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naalke- \'91to find\'92) (MATERIALY 443); uutghutaa neneghmeng \'91he changed his mind about eating\'92 (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , \'91went back on it, concerning the act of eating\'92); ighsaaquq aglaneghmeng \'91he has been refusing to go home\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aglagh- \'91to go home\'92)	activity of V-ing	state of being V											the act of V-ing; the activity of V-ing; the state of being V		pb PE n031				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96neq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub neq1	neq1	-\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 1\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96ragkiigh-	
\f0\b0 -hf[r74-	quickly V		qiyaragkiightuq \'91he cried quickly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); taaqragkiightuq \'91he finished quickly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to finish\'92); neragkiightuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0 neghragkiighaa \'91he ate it quickly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); kaarragkiightuq \'91he arrived quickly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); ingaghhragkiightuq \'91he lay down quickly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); iteragkiightuq \'91he came in quickly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to come in\'92); sukarragkiighutuq \'91he is running fast as in a race\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sukate- \'91to be fast\'92); ukiragkiightuq \'91he went down quickly\'92 (from ukig- \'91to go down\'92)													to V quickly						
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96ragkiigh-	
\f0\b0 ragkigh	ragkxgh	-\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1093 \u1082 \u1251 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96ragkiighute-	
\f0\b0 -hf[r74ens-	quickly V		Neveghhneghani, aghnam tamaghhaghmi iigga
\f1\b ragkiighut
\f0\b0 aqaat yuginaq tallii. \'91Whenever he lay down all the women 
\f1\b quickly
\f0\b0  put gloves onto his twenty arms (hands).\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iiggagh- \'91to put on gloves\'92) (MATERIALY 443)													to V quickly		< -ragkiigh-(u)te-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96ragkiighute-	
\f0\b0 ragkighute	ragkxghute	-\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1093 \u1082 \u1251 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96rakegtaq	
\f0\b0 -hfrs[nf2	quickly  (one that Vs ~)		sarakegtaq \'91a person that does things quickly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sa- \'91to do\'92)													one that Vs quickly		< -rakegte-aq		SLI Jr. Dict. 38		
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96rakegtaq	
\f0\b0 rakegtaq	rakegtaq	-\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96rakegte-	
\f0\b0 -hfrs[ns-	quickly V		nerakegtuq \'91he ate quicly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); tagirakegtuq \'91he came fast\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come\'92); esnegrakegtuq \'91it is very dark in color\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  esnek \'91bruise\'92)	very (be ~ much an N)												to V quickly; to be very much an N						
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96rakegte-	
\f0\b0 rakegte	rakegte	-\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96rakguugh-	
\f0\b0 -hfr84-	fast (be ~ at V-ing)		qepgharakguughtuq \'91he\'92s working fast\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92)	quicly (learn to V ~)								from De Reusse\'92s book - I can\'92t find an example in our texts., but it\'92s in Rubstova\'92s suffix list				to be fast at V-ing; to learn to V quickly						
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96rakguugh-	
\f0\b0 rakgugh	rakgxgh	-\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \u1263 \u1271 -\

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub \'96vag-	
\f0\b0 -dfu-	big way (V in a ~)		
\f2\i at most marginally productive; 
\f0\i0 qiyavagtuq \'91he cried intensely\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); tuutfagtuq \'91he stepped hard\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuute- \'91to step\'92); kakivagtuq \'91she's sewed intensely\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaki- \'91to sew\'92); atuvagtuq \'91he sang loudly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to sing\'92); yughavagtuq \'91he prayed fervently\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yughagh- \'91to pray\'92); qetgevagtuq \'91he jumped high or far\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qetgegh- \'91to jump\'92); 
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  -pag-, -ghpak	hard (V ~)	intensely V											to V in a big way; to V hard; to V intensely		pb PE va!(-)					vag	vag	-\uc0\u1074 \u1072 \u1075 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96yaag-	
\f0\b0 -9u-	strange (V in a ~ way)		kakiyaagtuq\'92she's sewing in a weird way\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaki- \'91to sew\'92); qepghayaagtuq \'91he's working in a weird way\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92); neghyaagtuq \'91he's eating in a weird way\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); = -saag-	weirdly V												to V in a strange way; to V weirdly							yag	yxg	-\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1075 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96yiilliqe-	
\f0\b0 -q7k]b2s-	trouble (have ~ V-ing)		tagiyiilliqut \'91they had trouble coming over\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come over\'92)													to have trouble V-ing		< -yiite-lliqe-					yilliqe	yxlliqe	-\uc0\u1253 \u1251 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96yiite-	
\f0\b0 -q7ns-	poorly V habitually		kakiyiituq \'91she sews poorly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaki- \'91to sew\'92); atuyiituq \'91he sings poorly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to sing\'92); meluyiituq \'91he doesn't take to smoking\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  melug- \'91to smoke\'92); Aawallunguq taana aghveng
\f1\b yiite
\f0\b0 ghllak umiilek aghvengaghtuq. \'91Finally then that captain, the one who 
\f1\b was very poor
\f0\b0  at catching whales, caught a whale!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghvenge- \'91to catch whales\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:218)													to poorly V habitually		< -yu-(ng)ite-; pb PE yu(&)it-    					yite	yxte	-\uc0\u1253 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96yu-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -/-\super \'99	\nosupersub well (generally V ~)		atuyuuq \'91he sings well\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to sing\'92)	good (be ~ at V-ing)												to be good at V-ing; to generally V well		pb PE -yu-					yu2	yu2	-\uc0\u1102 -2\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96yu\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -/\super \'a1	\nosupersub one who is good at V-ing		atuyu \'91a good singer\'92, atuyunguuq \'91he is a good singer\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to sing\'92)	good V-er												one who is good at V-ing		pb PE -yu-					yu1	yu1	-\uc0\u1102 1\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96yuqaq	
\f0\b0 -/2f2	good (one who is ~ at V-ing)		kakiyuqaq \'91one who is good at sewing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaki- \'91to sew\'92); aghvengyuqaq \'91one who is good at catching whales\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghvenge- \'91to catch whales\'92); neqengyuqaq \'91one who is good at getting food\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqenge- \'91to get food\'92)	proficient V-er												one who is good at V-ing; proficient V-er		< -yu-qaq					yuqaq	yuqaq	-\uc0\u1102 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub %mete-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -vsns-\'99	at (be ~ N)		
\f2\i a contraction of the singular localis ending
\f0\i0  %~\sub f\nosupersub mi 
\f2\i and the archaic verb base 
\f0\i0 ete- \'91to be\'92; 
\f2\i now a postbase in it\'92s own right 
\f0\i0 ; angyametuq \'91he is in the boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); kiiwmetuq \'91it is at the river\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiikw \'91river\'92); 
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  -nte-, -nite-\super 2	\nosupersub in (be ~ N)	be at or in N											to be at N; to be in N		pb PY m0t0-				
\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub %mete-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub mete2	mete2	-\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -2\

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +(a)ghesnagh-	
\f0\b0 -\'f8f\uc0\u960 4scy]f4-	just V		
\f2\i used only with vowel-ending bases (with consonant-ending bases
\f0\i0  -qiinagh-  
\f2\i is used instead); 
\f0\i0 qiyaghesnaghtuq \'91he is just crying\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); tagighesnaghtuq \'91he just came\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come\'92); a 
\f2\i is used with bases that end in
\f0\i0  e
\f2\i :
\f0\i0  aanaghesnaghtuq \'91he just went out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92); taaqaghesnaghtuq \'91he just quit\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to quit\'92);  kaataghesnaghtuq \'91he just arrived\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); Keniliighusimaghmeng piiqelghiit pillghughtefagilgagu ket
\f1\b aghesnagh
\f0\b0 yaghqaaluteng. 'They would also start working on the launching chutes for their boats so that before it was time [to go out whaling] they would not have to break a new path.' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kete- \'91to go out to sea\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:134); Yataaghqengngwaaghluni whaa nalugut
\f1\b aghesna
\f0\b0 an akuqaamakanga, qaakaa. 'He got ready and 
\f1\b as soon
\f0\b0  as the dog jumped again, he grabbed its paws and pulled it up.'(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nalugute- \'91to jump across\'92) (AKIINGQWAAGH. 12); Nengyaan esghapagumakanga uteghmun qiiv
\f1\b aghesnagh
\f0\b0 aqluni naayghaghlluginaghmun taglalghii. 'His grandmother watched Sulpik keep looking back over his shoulder as he headed straight for the mountains.' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiive- \'91to turn body or head\'92) (AKIINGQWAAGH. 53); Aamtaam nefkunaghsimaan unakegkat kaatut
\f1\b aghesnaq
\f0\b0  nefkulghiini, maaten elpesi nefkulleghpesistun taawa allangwaaqut. \'91The meat that had been caught 
\f2\i latter
\f0\i0  in the season and hung right away had a whole different taste.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaatute- \'91to come (together)\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:88)	just now V	only V											to just V; to V just now; to only V (and perhaps in vain)		
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  CAY 
\f2\i pb.
\f0\i0  -nricenar- \'91to not V afterall\'92 -- 
\f2\i partly a cognate				
\f1\i0\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +(a)ghesnagh-	
\f0\b0 aghesnagh	aghesnagh	-(\uc0\u1072 )\u1271 \u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +laatagh-	
\f0\b0 -kznf4-	again V		angyaghlaataghtuq \'91he went out in a boat again\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyagh- \'91to go out in a boat\'92); tel 
\f2\i from this postbase becomes 
\f0\i0 ll: guullaataghaa \'91he shot it again\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  guute- \'91to shoot\'92); Taagken igleghsimalghii aghnelqusiq. Unugyagu aghuliighumalghii. Aghuliighluni angyaatamineng neghumalghii. Neneghmeng taaqluni qavaamalghii. Unaami taghtughluni iglegh
\f1\b llaatagh
\f0\b0 tuq aghnelqusiq. 'Then he traveled all day. When night fell he stopped. After stopping he ate his food for the journey. When he finished eating he slept. In the morning after waking up he traveled 
\f1\b again
\f0\b0  all day.' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igleghte- 'to travel') (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 15)	more (V ~)												to V again; to V more; to V anyway					> -naqlaatagh-	
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +laatagh-	
\f0\b0 latagh	lxtagh	-\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +leghagh-	
\f0\b0 -ks4f4-	slowly and continously V		
\f2\i non-productive (?); 
\f0\i0 aanleghaghtuq \'91it seeped or flowed out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92);  siingleghaghaa \'91he pushed it continuously, planed it (wood)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  siinge- \'91to push\'92); tel 
\f2\i from this postbase becomes 
\f0\i0 ll: uuglleghaghtut\'92 they came up something one after another\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uugte- \'91to get up onto something\'92)	continously and slowly V												to V slowly and continuously						
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +leghagh-	
\f0\b0 leghagh	leghagh	-\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +mig-	
\f0\b0 -vbu-	hold in one\'92s N		qaneghmigaa \'91he put or held it in his mouth\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaneq \'91mouth\'92); kalngagmigaa \'91he put it into the sealskin bag, he stored it away (
\f2\i especially
\f0\i0 , in a bag)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kalngak \'91sealskin bag\'92); = -miigh-	put in one\'92s N												to hold in one\'92s N; to put in one\'92s N		pb PE mi!-				
\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +mig-	
\f0\b0 mig	mig	-\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1075 -\

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +mii	
\f0\b0 -v7	resident of N		Ungazighmii \'91resident of New Chaplino\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Ungaziq \'91New Chaplino\'92); Sivungaghmii \'91resident of Savoonga\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Sivungaq \'91Savoonga\'92); Quutmiit \'91Chukotkans\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Quta\super e\nosupersub  \'91Chukotka\'92); Sivuqaghhmiit \'91residents of Gambell or St. Lawrence Island\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Sivuqaq \'91Gambell or St. Lawrence Island\'92); Pugughileghmiit \'91people of, or ancestrally from, Pugughileq (\'93Poowooiliak\'94)\'92); Ruuseghmii \'91Russian\'92 (from English or Russian \'93Russia\'94); Iintiyaghmii \'91Indian\'92 (
\f2\i from English
\f0\i0  \'93India(n)\'94)	inhabitant of N												resident of N; inhabitant of N		pb PE mi3u				
\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +mii	
\f0\b0 mi	mx	-\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +miigh-	
\f0\b0 -v74-	hold in one\'92s N		qaneghmiighaa \'91he put or held it in his mouth\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaneq \'91mouth\'92); eggmiighaa \'91he held it clamped between his teeth\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  egge- \'91to crimp or hold with teeth\'92); = -mig-	put in one\'92s N												to hold in one\'92s N; to put in one\'92s N		pb PE mi!-				
\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +miigh-	
\f0\b0 migh	mxgh	-\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1271 -\

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +miiq	
\f0\b0 -v72	thing held in one\'92s N		qaneghmiiq \'91a thing held in the mouth\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaneq \'91mouth\'92); eggmiiq \'91something held between upper and lower teeth\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  egge- \'91to crimp or hold with teeth\'92); = -mik													thing held in one\'92s N; thing held by V-ing		pb PE mi!-				
\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +miiq	
\f0\b0 miq	mxq	-\uc0\u1084 \u1251 \u1179 \

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +mik	
\f0\b0 -vbr	thing held in one\'92s N		qaneghmik \'91a thing held in the mouth\'92; whaamik \'91son\'92 
\f2\i (endearing term) (from
\f0\i0  wha(ni) \'91right here\'92); = -miiq													thing held in one\'92s N		pb PE mi!-				
\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +mik	
\f0\b0 mik	mik	-\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1082 \

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +miqe-	
\f0\b0 -vb2s-	compel one to V		
\f2\i this is a \'93compound verbal\'94 postbase; 
\f0\i0 qiyamiqaa \'91he made her cry\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); neghmiqaa \'91he made her eat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); taaqmiqaa \'91he made her quit\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to quit\'92); qavaghmiqaa \'91he made her sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); tuqutmiqaa \'91he made someone kill it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqute- \'91to kill\'92); ingaghhmiqaa \'91he made her lie down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); Nanevgaghllagem yaghlegi taghnughhaghhaak mileg
\f1\b miq
\f0\b0 aak. \'91The old man 
\f1\b made
\f0\b0  the two little boys feel sad instead.\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 mileg- \'91sadness\'92 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  milegtaagh- \'91to be depressed\'92) (UNGIPAGH. 37)	make one V												to compel one to V; to make one V		pb PY-S miq0-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +miqe-	
\f0\b0 miqe	miqe	-\uc0\u1084 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +na-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -yf-\'a1	
\f2\i command former		forms commands, requests, etc. directed toward the future; takes itransitive participial endings and yields forms having a future optative meaning; 
\f0\i0 neghnaken \'91(you\sub 1\nosupersub ) eat it (future), neghnaketen \'91(you\sub 1\nosupersub ) eat them (in the future)\'92, neghnakesi \'91(you\sub pl.\nosupersub ) eat them (future)\'92(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); kayusighnakevnga \'91(you) help me (future)\'92(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kayusigh- \'91to help\'92); atuqnakevut 'let's use it (future)'(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atuqe- \'91to use\'92); 
\f2\i for intransitives, postbases
\f0\i0  -lghaa- 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  -ggaa-/-ghhaa- 
\f2\i (q.v.) are used instead
\f0\i0  	
\f2\i request former												command or request former						
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +na-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub na1	na1	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 -1\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +na-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -yf-\'99	in order to V		
\f2\i used with subordinative mood endings; 
\f0\i0 neghnaluni \'91in order to eat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); kuuvnaluku \'91in order to spill it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill\'92); tuqunnaluki \'91in order to kill them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqute- \'91to kill\'92); laalighhnaluni \'91in order to visit\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laalighte- \'91to visit\'92); atughnaluku \'91in order to use it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to use\'92); aanaluni 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aanenaluni \'91in order to go out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92); ingaghtuq qavaghnaluni \'91he lay down in order to sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); igiightunga aglaghnalunga \'91I have decided to go home\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aglagh- \'91to go home\'92); Uugtaqelghiik sikum qaaynganun meghnaali
\f1\b na
\f0\b0 lutek ama qavagh
\f1\b na
\f0\b0 lutek. \'91They\sub 2\nosupersub  would climb on top of the ice 
\f1\b in order to
\f0\b0  rest and 
\f1\b in order to
\f0\b0  sleep.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meghnaali- \'91to rest\'92 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92) (QUNGLUK 7)	to V												in order to V; to V		pb PE na-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +na-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub na2	na2	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 -2\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naagh-	
\f0\b0 -y64-	going to V eventually (be ~)		taginaaghtuq \'91he will come eventually\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come over\'92); ingaghhnaaghtuq \'91he will lie down eventually\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); kaannaaghtuq \'91he will arrive eventually\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92)	eventually be going to V												to be going to V eventually		pb PE ni(C)a3-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naagh-	
\f0\b0 nagh	nxgh	-\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naanghite-	
\f0\b0 -y6y4bns-	not V in the future		tuqunaanghituq \'91he won't die\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqu- \'91to die\'92); neghnaanghitaa \'91he won't eat it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); tuqunnaanghitanka \'91I won't kill them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqute- \'91to kill\'92); neghyugnaanghituq \'91he won't want to eat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghyug- \'91to want to eat\'92)	won't V												to not V in the future; won't V		< -naagh-nghite-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naanghite-	
\f0\b0 nanghite	nxnghite	-\uc0\u1085 \u257 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +nagh-	
\f0\b0 -yf4-	cause V-ing		
\f2\i used with "emotional roots" as well as certain other bases;  
\f0\i0 yiminaghtuq \'91he is intimidating, he makes others feel shy\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root 
\f0\i0  yimi- \'91intimidated\'92); igamsiqanaghtuq \'91it makes one thankful\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root
\f0\i0  igamsiqa- \'91thankful\'92); nallunaghtuq \'91it\'92s hard to know\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nallu- \'91to not know\'92); nenglaghnaghtuq \'91it\'92s funny\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nenglagh- \'91to laugh\'92); tuqunaghtuq \'91it\'92s poisonous\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqu- \'91to die\'92); uguqnaghtuq \'91it\'92s burning hot\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uguqe- \'91to burn\'92)													to cause V-ing		pb PE na3				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +nagh-	
\f0\b0 nagh	nagh	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +nanigh-	
\f0\b0 -yfyb4-	cease V-ing		
\f2\i includes both temporary and permanent cessation; 
\f0\i0 qepghaghnanightuq \'91he quit working\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92); yughaghnanightuq \'91he stopped praying\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yughagh- \'91to pray\'92); kuuvnanighaa \'91he stopped pouring or spilling it (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  on it)\'92(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to pour, to spill\'92)	stop V-ing	quit V-ing											to cease V-ing; to stop V-ing; to quit V-ing						
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +nanigh-	
\f0\b0 nanigh	nanigh	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +nanighqe-	
\f0\b0 -yfyb52s-	make one cease V-ing		qallegnanighqaa \'91he made him quiet down, left him speechless\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qalleg- \'91to speak\'92); Taawa kaataa kitughaa sa
\f1\b nanighq
\f0\b0 aa. \'91He caught up with him, passed him, 
\f1\b made him cease
\f0\b0 .\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sa- \'91to do something\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:20)													to make one cease V-ing		< -nanigh-ghqe\super \'a3\nosupersub -				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +nanighqe-	
\f0\b0 nanighqe	nanighqe	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naq	
\f0\b0 -yf2	causes (something that ~ V-ing)		
\f2\i used with "emotional roots" as well as other some bases; 
\f0\i0 aklunaq \'91time of scarcity\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aklu- \'91to be in need\'92); yiminaq \'91one who is intimidating\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root 
\f0\i0 yimi- \'91intimidated\'92); iyataghnaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  igataghnaq \'91famine\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iyatagh- 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  igatagh- \'91to be hungry\'92); kalevnaq \'91deep soft snow\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaleve- \'91to sink into snow, mud, etc.\'92); kasugnaq \'91rough, splashing water\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kasug- \'91to hit or be hit\'92); nangghanaq \'91interesting thing\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root 
\f0\i0 nanggha- \'91interested\'92); neghnaq \'91crab\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized; from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); nenglaghnaq \'91funny thing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nenglagh- \'91to laugh\'92); palluggnaq \'91rough water\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pallugte- \'91to thrash around in the water\'92); qaasninaq \'91stinging thing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaasni- \'91to sting\'92)													something that causes V-ing		pb PE na3-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naq	
\f0\b0 naq	naq	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -yf2f\super s	\nosupersub one who is going to V		neqennaqa \'91one who is going to catch fish or game\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqete- \'91to catch fish or game\'92); qimugsighnaqet \'91those people who are going out on dogsleds\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qimugsigh- \'91to run dogs\'92); unkuseniighyaghnaqa qaghlughiiq \'91the person who is going trapping is harnessing his team\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  unkuseniigh- \'91to trap\'92)													one who is going to V						
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqa\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub naqa	naqa	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1072 \u1099 \

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqe-	
\f0\b0 -yf2s-	going to V in the near future		taaqnaquq \'91he'll quit soon; he's trying to quit\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to quit\'92); kaannaquq \'91he'll arrive soon\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); qavaghnaquq \'91he'll sleep soon; he's trying to sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); kennaquq \'91he is going to go out to sea\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kete- \'91to go out to sea\'92); aanaquq \'91he is going to go out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92); aannaquq \'91he is going to put on a garment\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aate- \'91to put on (garment)\'92)	try to V												to be going to V in the near future; to try to V		pb PY-S naq0-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqe-	
\f0\b0 naqe	naqe	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqelqusiigh-	
\f0\b0 -yf2sk]2ec74-	stall at V-ing		taginaqelqusiightuq \'91he's delaying coming over\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come over\'92)	delay at V-ing												to stall or delay at V-ing.		< -naqe-lqusiigh-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqelqusiigh-	
\f0\b0 naqelqusigh	naqelqusxgh	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqlaatagh-	
\f0\b0 -yf2k]zn64-	again going to V		qiyanaqlaataghtuq \'91he's crying again\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); eltekeltaghnaqlaataghtuq \'91he's giggling again\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  eltekeltagh- \'91to giggle\'92); Seghleghhalek, seghletun kiyaghh
\f1\b naqlaatagh
\f0\b0 tukut, averngulta! \'91So bad, we are 
\f1\b again going to
\f0\b0  be living poorly, so let\'92s have some escape entertainment!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiyaghte- \'91to live\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:120)													to V again be going to V		< -naqe-laatagh-    				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqlaatagh-	
\f0\b0 naqlatagh	naqlxtagh	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqngu-	
\f0\b0 -yf23]e-	have to V		Weni tuqusiigh
\f1\b naqngu
\f0\b0 nghilkumta sanaqaghten! \'91Okay, if we are not going to (i.e., do not 
\f1\b have to
\f0\b0 ) wait for our death here, do something!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqusiigh- \'91to wait around to die\'92) (UNGIPAGHAGH. 62)									more examples needed				to have to V						
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqngu-	
\f0\b0 naqngu	naqngu	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1187 \u1100 \u1091 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqute-	
\f0\b0 -yf2ens-	try to V											examples?				to try to V		< -naqe-(u)te-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqute-	
\f0\b0 naqute	naqute	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqutke-	
\f0\b0 -yf2enrs-	try to V (it)		atughnaqutkuq \'91he's trying to sing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to sing\'92); kuuvnaqutkaa \'91he's trying to spill it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill\'92);  tuunaqutkaa \'91he's trying to give it to someone\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuune- \'91to give\'92)													to try to V (it)		< -naqe-(u)tke-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +naqutke-	
\f0\b0 naqutke	naqutke	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +natke-	
\f0\b0 -yfnrs-	use (it) in order to V		Quyillegnun akikumaaqegkangat quynging
\f1\b natk
\f0\b0 umaaqegkangat. \'91They\'92d trade them to the Chukchis 
\f1\b using them to
\f0\b0  obtain reindeer.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  quynginge- \'91to obtain reindeer\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:198)	have (it) in order to V												to use or have (it) in order to V		< -na-(u)tke-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +natke-	
\f0\b0 natke	natke	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +nayagh-	
\f0\b0 -yfz4-	could V		Ighivgaqun neghesqesaqanganga, whaten pi
\f1\b nayagh
\f0\b0 aqa, \'93iiwenllu neneghmeng taaqaqunga; tagiiquten.\'94 Llaaghanwha negh
\f1\b naya
\f0\b0 nghitunga. \'91Tonight when he tells me to eat I 
\f2\i could
\f0\i0  say to him like this, \'93well I finished eating just as you were coming.\'94  And I 
\f1\b should
\f0\b0 n\'92t eat [now].\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pi- \'91to say to\'92 (
\f2\i the meaning here
\f0\i0 ), 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92) (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 73)	might V	should V							more examples needed	would V			could V; might V; should V; would V						
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +nayagh-	
\f0\b0 nayagh	nayagh	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1103 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +nayuke-	
\f0\b0 -yf/rs-	think that one might V		
\f2\i used only in narratives (?); this is a \'93compound verbal\'94 postbase									
\f0\i0 needs examples				to think that one might V				from de Reusse		
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +nayuke-	
\f0\b0 nayuke	nayuke	-\uc0\u1085 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -\

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +nga-	
\f0\b0 -3f-	state of V or of having V-ed (be in a ~)		
\f2\i used with postural roots and certain other verb bases; 
\f0\i0 ingaghngaaq \'91he is lying down\'92 
\f2\i (describing the state rather than the act)
\f0\i0  (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  
\f2\i postural root 
\f0\i0 ingagh- \'91lying down\'92); kepngaaq \'91it is severed\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kepe- \'91to sever\'92); liitngaaq \'91he is aware\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  liite- \'91to learn\'92); avegngaaq \'91it is divided in two\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aveg- \'91to divide in two\'92); atkugngaaq \'91he is wearing a parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkug- \'91to put on a partka\'92); nasaperaghngaaq \'91he is wearing a hat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nasaperagh- \'91to put on a hat\'92); 
\f2\i this postbase drops
\f0\i0  te 
\f2\i from the base where that 
\f0\i0 te 
\f2\i is preceded by a fricative which then becomes voiced (or, perhaps more properly, goes back to a root where the fricative is voiced): 
\f0\i0 piivngaaq \'91it is set out for use\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  piifte- \'91to set out for use\'92); piizngaaq \'91it is sticking out, projecting\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  piiste- \'91to stick out, to project\'92); qiwaaghngaaq \'91it has short fur\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiwaagh- \'91to shear fur short\'92)	having V-ed (be in a state of V or of ~)												to be in a state of V or of having V-ed		pb PE &a-1				
\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +nga-	
\f0\b0 nga	nga	-\uc0\u1187 \u1072 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +ni-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -yb-\super \'a1	\nosupersub say that one is V-ing or being V-ed		
\f2\i this is a \'93compound verbal\'94 postbase; 
\f0\i0 taginii \'91he says he (another) came over\'92; taginiiq \'91he says he (himself came over\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come over\'92); kuuvnii \'91he says it spilled\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill\'92); laalighhnii \'91he says he (another person) is visiting\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laalighte- \'91to visit\'92); igataghniiq \'91he says he (himself) is hungry\'92, igtataghniiten \'91he says you are hungry\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igatagh- \'91to be hungry\'92); Kii, akugaaq ungipaatngwaaghamken aghnaghllagmun puughnnaq
\f1\b ni
\f0\b0 luten.  \'91Golly, yesterday I certainly told you (
\f1\b saying
\f0\b0 ) that you would be deceived by the big woman.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  puughhnaqe- \'91to be going to deceive\'92) (AYUM. UNGIP. II:11); Takukestaghngaaghmigu sumeghtaghaamalghii uyavannaq
\f1\b ni
\f0\b0 luku. \'91While he was going to it he thought (
\f1\b thinking
\f0\b0 ) that it would be too far.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uyavannaqe- \'91to be going to be far\'92) (UNGIPAGHAGH. 78)	think that one is V-ing or being V-ed												to say that one is V-ing or being V-ed; to think that one is V-ing or being V-ed		pb PE ni-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +ni-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ni1	ni1	-\uc0\u1085 \u1080 -1\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +niite-	
\f0\b0 -y7ns-	not cause one to V		
\f2\i negative of
\f0\i0  -nagh- 
\f2\i (q.v.); 
\f0\i0 nalluniituq \'91it is easy to know, perceive\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nallu- \'91to not know\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  nallunaghtuq \'91it is hard to know, perceive\'92); yakughniituq \'91it is not dangerous\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root
\f0\i0  yakugh-, 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  yakughnagh- \'91to be dangerous\'92)													to not cause one to V		< -nagh-(ng)ite-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +niite-	
\f0\b0 nite	nxte	-\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +niq	
\f0\b0 -yb2	good to V (thing that is ~)		esghaghniq \'91thing that is eye-catching or attractive\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  esghagh- \'91to see\'92)													thing that is good to V		pb PE n(n)i3-				
\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub +niq	
\f0\b0 niq	niq	-\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1179 \

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +ragh-	
\f0\b0 -hf4-	repeatedly V though perhaps unnecessarily or unsucessfully		qimagraghtuq \'91he keeps trying to flee\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qimag- \'91to flee\'92); tuqlughraghtuq \'91he keeps calling out in vain\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqlugh- \'91to call out\'92); melugraghtuq \'91he\'92s repeatedly sucking something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  melug- \'91to suck\'92); puvugraghtuq \'91it\'92s repeatedly pecking\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  puvug- \'91to peck\'92); qesugraghaa \'91he\'92s repeatedly or continuously pulling it out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qesug- \'91to pull out\'92); qupughraghaa \'91he\'92s shreding it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qupugh- \'91to split\'92); saagraghaa \'91he\'92s spreading it out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  saag- \'91to scatter\'92); supughraghaa \'91he\'92s repeatedly blowing on it (the fire)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  supugh- \'91to blow on\'92); tukeghraghtuq \'91he\'92s repeatedly kicking with both feet\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tukegh- \'91to kick with both feet\'92); tuqlughraghtuq \'91he\'92s repeatedly calling out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqlugh- \'91to call out\'92); alungraghtuq \'91it\'92s repeatedly licking (its paws, often)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alunge- \'91to lick\'92); 
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  aarraghtuq \'91he\'92s dressing in a fancy way\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aate- \'91to dress\'92; 
\f2\i though perhaps not with this postbase
\f0\i0 )	continuously V though perhaps unnecessarily or unsucessfully												to repeatedly or continuously V though perhaps unnecessarily or unsucessfully		pb PE -9a3- and -9aq0-				
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +ragh-	
\f0\b0 ragh	ragh	-\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +vik	
\f0\b0 -dbr	place to V or for V-ing		inivik \'91place to hang things\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ini- \'91to hang\'92); neghvik \'91place to eat\'92 (from negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); taaqfik \'91stopping place\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to stop\'92); kaatfik \'91place to arrive\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); ingaghfik \'91place to lie down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); qavaghvik \'91place to sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); yughaghvik \'91church\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yughagh- \'91to pray\'92); igaghvik \'91school, writing place\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igagh- \'91to write\'92); iteghvik \'91entrance\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to enter\'92); meghtaghvik \'91well or other place to get water\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meghtagh- \'91to get water\'92); nalugvik \'91airfield, site where birds land\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nalug- \'91to land from the air\'92); nuuvik 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nuufik \'91eye of needle, eyelet\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuuve- \'91to thread\'92); qungughvik \'91cemetary\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qungugh- \'91to bury\'92); sughmavik \'91checkerboard, or checkerboard-patterned material\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sughma- \'91to play checkers or chess\'92); ulimavik \'91workshop, factory\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ulima- \'91to make\'92); 
\f2\i in addition, many month names contain this postbase, for example: 
\f0\i0 Palighvik \'91August, September\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  paligh- \'91to turn autumn colors (of vegetation)\'92	time to V (esp. in month names)	
\f2\i month name former
\f0\i0 (time to V)											place to V; time to V (esp. in month names)		pb PE -9vi! or vi!					vik	vik	-\uc0\u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +vike-	
\f0\b0 -dbrs-	have as a place of one's V-ing or as an object of one's V-ing		quyavikaa \'91he is thankful to her\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  quya- \'91to be thankful\'92); uqiitfikaa \'91he took shelter in it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uqiite- \'91to take shelter\'92); igughivikaa \'91he is sticking up for someone against him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igughi- \'91to stick up for someone, to defend someone verbally\'92); igamsiqayugvikamken \'91I am thankful to you, I thank you\'92 (
\f2\i from 
\f0\i0 igamsiqayug- \'91to feel thankful\'92)													to have as a place or as object of one's V-ing		< -vik-ke-   					vike	vike	-\uc0\u1074 \u1080 \u1082 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaaghagh-	
\f0\b0 -94f4-	readily V		liisaaghaghtuq \'91he readily learns (a little)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  liite- \'91to learn\'92); qeneghsaaghaghtuq \'91he easily feels slighted\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qeneghte- \'91to get angry\'92); temsiyaaghagh- \'91to want to laugh but supress it\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  temsi- \'91find something funny\'92, 
\f2\i as in other Eskimo languages)									
\f0\i0 needs more examples				to readily V							yaghagh	yxghagh	-\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaaghte-	
\f0\b0 -95ns-	learn to V		atughyaaghtuq \'91he learned to sing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to sing\'92)									needs more examples				to learn to V		pb PE ya-					yaghte	yxghte	-\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yagh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -z4-\'a1	to (go somewhere in order ~ V)		inghuyaghtuq \'91he went to pick berries\'92; (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  inghu- \'91to pick berries\'92); Santiyaghtuq \'91he went to Sunday service\'92; (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Santi \'91Sunday service\'92); qawaagyaghtuq \'91he went bird hunting\'92; (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qawaak \'91bird\'92); ukazighyaghtuq \'91he went rabbit (hare) hunting\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ukaziq \'91rabbit (hare)\'92); Kusmeyaghtuq \'91he went home for Christmas\'92; (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Kusma\super e\nosupersub  \'91Christmas\'92); movie-yaghtuq \'91he went to a movie\'92; igaghyaghtuq \'91he went to school; he is attending school\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igagh- \'91to write\'92); lluuquyaghtuq \'91he went hunting with a sling\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  lluuqu- \'91to use a sling\'92); neghsaghyaghtuq \'91he is hunting seal\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghsaq \'91seal\'92); ayveghyaghtuq \'91he is hunting walrus\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayveq \'91walrus\'92); kaviighyaghtuq \'91he is hunting fox\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaviiq \'91fox\'92); quyngighyaghtuq \'91he went after reindeer\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  quyngiq \'91reindeer\'92); Aghnaghaghyaget pagunghagh
\f1\b ya
\f0\b0 amalghiit. \'91Lots of girls 
\f1\b went
\f0\b0  
\f1\b out picking
\f0\b0  berries.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pagunghaq \'91berry\'92) (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 71)	go V-ing	hunt N								celebrate (go to ~ N)			to go somewhere in order to V; to go V-ing; to go to celebrate N; to hunt N		pb PE -ya3-					yagh1	yagh1	-\uc0\u1103 \u1271 -1\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yagh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -z4-\'99	but (to V ~ \'85)		inghuyaghyaghtuq \'91he went to pick berries, but it  didn't work out as planned or as desired\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  inghu- \'91to pick berries \'91); Nutaan neghnaq
\f1\b sagh
\f0\b0 tuq ighlegutaa. \'91
\f1\b In vain
\f0\b0  he tried to eat , but he [his father] refused to give anything to him.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghnaqe- \'91to be going to eat\'92) (UNGIPAGHAGH. 67); 
\f2\i also occurs in the marker of the \'93participial oblique\'94 verb mood; cf.
\f0\i0  -kaayagh-	vain (to V in ~)	without the desired results (V ~)											to V but \'85; to V in vain; to V without the desired results		pb PE -ya3-					yagh2	yagh2	-\uc0\u1103 \u1271 -2\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghagh-	
\f0\b0 -z4f4-	early (V ~)		aanyaghaghtuq \'91he went out early\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92); taghtughyaghaghtuq \'91he woke up early\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taghtugh- \'91to awaken\'92); Seghleghhalek maakughsi neghlaaghpenaasi kepsugh
\f1\b yaghagh
\f0\b0 llequsi, \'85. \'91Listen, don\'92t eat too much too fast or you might get full 
\f1\b too soon
\f0\b0 , \'85.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kepsugh- \'91to be full (of food)\'92)(SULUWET 88); 
\f2\i also may appear in a nominalized form: 
\f0\i0 aanyaghaq \'91first one out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92), 
\f2\i and maybe
\f0\i0  aawhkayaghaq \'91several days ago, some time ago\'92 (
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 aawkagh- \'91for spring to come\'92)													V early		pb PE -ya3a3-					yaghagh	yaghagh	-\uc0\u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghaq	
\f0\b0 -z4f2	device for V-ing		
\f2\i non-productive;
\f0\i0  qiivyaghaq \'91bend in trail\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiive- \'91to turn\'92); nugyaghaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nungyaghaq \'91tunnel entrance to semi-subterranean house\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  nuge-, 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  nuug- \'91to come to the surface\'92); nevyaghaq \'91baleen strip used for fishing line\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neve- \'91to cling\'92); tevyaghaq \'91mountain pass\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  teve- \'91to go over\'92)	place for V-ing												device for V-ing; place for V-ing		+ pb PE ya3aq (cf. Central Alaskan Yup\'92ik -ya3aq \'91way to V, device for V-ing\'92					yaghaq	yaghaq	-\uc0\u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghpete-	
\f0\b0 -z5gsns-	evidently have V-ed but in vain		iteghyaghpetuq \'91evidently he went in but in vain\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to go in\'92)	vain (evidently have V-ed but in ~)												to evidently have V-ed but in vain		< -yagh\super 2\nosupersub -fte/pete-					yaghpete	yaghpete	-\uc0\u1103 \u1203 \u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghqaa-	
\f0\b0 -z526-	need to V		
\f2\i takes intransitive endings only; 
\f0\i0 Natenngam pilleqesta, sa
\f1\b yaghqaa
\f0\b0 sta, apaay? \'91How will we act, what 
\f1\b should
\f0\b0  we do, grandpa?\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sa- \'91to do what\'92) (KALLAG. 77);
\f2\i the final
\f0\i0  a 
\f2\i is underlyingly
\f0\i0  u, 
\f2\i thus
\f0\i0  w 
\f2\i rather than
\f0\i0  g 
\f2\i in
\f0\i0 , sameng neghyaghqaawa? \'91what should he eat?\'92; 
\f2\i for transitives the postbase 
\f0\i0 -yaghqaqe- 
\f2\i is used instead	
\f0\i0 supposed to V	future (V in the ~)							examples needed				to need to V; to be supposed to V; to V in the future		< -yaghqaq-(ng)u-; pb PY yarka(C)u-					yaghqa	yaghqx	-\uc0\u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u257 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghqaaghte-	
\f0\b0 -952f5ns-	have to V now		Enkaam pingayu ayumiqulleq atughluku amiinguq simigh
\f1\b yaghqaaghte
\f0\b0 kayuguftut. \'91And after three years its [the boat\'92s] skins would be 
\f1\b due for
\f0\b0  a change.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  simigh- \'91to change\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:168)	necessary (become ~ to V)												to become necessary to V; to have to V now							yaghqaghte	yaghqxghte	-\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghqaq	
\f0\b0 -z52f2	something that will V or be V-ed		inghuyaghqat \'91berries to be picked\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  inghu- \'91to pick berries\'92); neghyaghqaq \'91something to eat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); tuqusaghqaq \'91something to kill\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqute- \'91to kill\'92); qavaghyaghqaq \'91someone who will sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); laagyaghqaq \'91that which will be dug\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laag- \'91to dig\'92); igaghyaghqaq \'91paper, writing paper\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igagh- \'91to write\'92)	will V or be V-ed (something that ...)												something that will V or be V-ed							yaghqaq	yaghqaq	-\uc0\u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghqaqe-	
\f0\b0 -z52f2s-	need to V		
\f2\i takes transitive endings only ; example: 
\f0\i0 Paninang akeqluku keneghmun anusimingllagh
\f1\b yaghqaqe
\f0\b0 gkanga. \'91Thus He [God] had promised him that he 
\f1\b would
\f0\b0  punish him [the Devil] in the fire [of Hell].\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  anusimingllagh- \'91to punish\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:252); 
\f2\i for transitive endings the postbase 
\f0\i0 -yaghqaa- 
\f2\i is used instead	
\f0\i0 supposed to V	future (V in the ~)											to need to V; to be supposed to V; to V in the future		< -yaghqaq-ke\super 1\nosupersub -					yaghqaqe	yaghqaqe	-\uc0\u1103 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghtugh-	
\f0\b0 -z5ne4-	about to V		aglaghyaghtughtuq \'91he is about to go home, to leave\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aglagh- \'91to go home, to leave\'92)	go somewhere to V												to be about to V; to go somewhere to V		pb PE ya3(tu3)-					yaghtugh	yaghtugh	-\uc0\u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yagute-	
\f0\b0 -zuens-	reach a state of V-ing		nalluyagutaa \'91he finds that he doesn't know enough about it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nallu- to not know\'92); piksagutaqa \'91it's mine now; I own it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pike- \'91to own\'92); aflengaksagutaa \'91he has come to value and care for it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aflengake- \'91to value and care for\'92); takaghyagutaa \'91he has become shy toward him\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root
\f0\i0  takagh- \'91shy\'92)	state of V-ing												to reach a state of V-ing		pb PE yya!-					yagute	yagute	-\uc0\u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaquna-	
\f0\b0 -z2eyf-	don't ever V!		
\f2\i emphatic prohibition for the future; used with endings somewhat like those of the special subordinative in 
\f0\i0 -na-
\f2\i ; cf.
\f0\i0  -gpe-; aghulaqsaqunang \'91don't ever leave\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghulaqe- \'91to leave\'92);  neghyaqunaan \'91don't ever eat it\'92, neghyaqunaki \'91don\'92t ever eat them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92)													don't ever V!		pb PE yaqu(na!)					yaquna	yaquna	-\uc0\u1103 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \u1072 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yug-	
\f0\b0 -/u-	want to V		tagiyugtuq \'91he wants to come over\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come over\'92); neghyugaa \'91he wants to eat it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92);  taaqsugtuq \'91he wants to quit\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to quit\'92); aaghhwsugtuq \'91he wants to crawl\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aaghhwe- \'91to crawl\'92); tuqusugaa \'91he wants to kill it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqute- \'91to kill\'92); laalighsugaa \'91he wants to visit him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laalighte- \'91to visit\'92); atughyugaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  atuqsugaa \'91he wants to use it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  atuqe- \'91to use\'92); qupneghyugtuq \'91he wants some whitefish\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qupneq \'91whitefish\'92); akuutaghyugtuq \'91he want some Eskimo ice cream\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akuutaq \'91Eskimo ice cream\'92); kamegyugtuq \'91he wants skin-boots\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kamek \'91skin-boot\'92); tuquyugtuq \'91he is deathly ill\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqu- \'91to die\'92); qinuyugtuq \'91he is sick; he is overwhelmed by the tasks facing him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qinu- \'91to be disinclined to act\'92); yimiyugtuq \'91he feels shy, intimidated\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root 
\f0\i0 yimi- \'91shy, intimidated\'92)	want some N	tend toward V-ing								feel V
\f2\i  (with emotional roots)			
\f0\i0 to want to V; to want some N; to tend toward V-ing; to feel V (with emotional roots)		pb PE -yu!-					yug	yug	-\uc0\u1102 \u1075 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuggaagh-	
\f0\b0 -0[64-	first V		Kii, Sivungaq neli
\f1\b yuggaagh
\f0\b0 aqngan iyataghniituq. \'91Golly, while Savoonga 
\f1\b was being established
\f0\b0  there was no cause for hunger.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neli- \'91to establish (a) household(s)\'92) (SIVUQ. UNGIP. 19); = -yuwhaagh-	beginning (V in the ~)												to first V; to V in the beginning							yuggagh	yuggxgh	-\uc0\u1102 \u772 \u1093 \u257 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuggaaq	
\f0\b0 -/[62	first one to V		quyngighniightek
\f1\b suggaagh
\f0\b0 et \'91the 
\f1\b first
\f0\b0  population to have reindeer herders\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  quyngighniighteke- \'91to have (as one\'92s) reindeer herder\'92) (SIVUQ. UNGIP. 21); = -yuwhaaq													first one to V							yuggaq	yuggxq	-\uc0\u1102 \u1093 \u257 \u1179 \

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yugnagh-	
\f0\b0 -/uyf52s-	easy (be ~ to V)		atughyugnaghtuq \'91it is easy to use\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to use\'92); llaaghaaghyugnaghtuq \'91it is probable\'92 (
\f2\i related to particle
\f0\i0  llaaghan \'91certainly\'92)													to be easy to V		pb PE yuna3-					yugnagh	yugnagh	-\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1072 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuguma-	
\f0\b0 -/uevf-	easy (be ~ to V)		kagimyugumaaq \'91it is easily crushed\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kagime- \'91to get crushed\'92)													to be easy to V		pb PE -yu!uma-					yuguma	yuguma	-\uc0\u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1084 \u1072 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yukagh-	
\f0\b0 -/rf4-	ready (be ~ to V)		
\f2\i usually (or always?) used with the negative postbase 
\f0\i0 -gpe- 
\f2\i and the special subordinative in
\f0\i0  -na-; Iiggeni alqim
\f1\b yukagh
\f0\b0 penaki taaqaa. 'Without even 
\f1\b making a move
\f0\b0  toward licking her hands she finished it.' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alqime- 'to lick') (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:198); Ang, piighhangllaa. Nuvag
\f1\b sukagh
\f0\b0 penaan mekegragh
\f1\b yukagh
\f0\b0 penaan. 'Yes, braid [some thread]. But don't even 
\f1\b make a move toward 
\f0\b0 moistening the strands with saliva or smoothing them out with your teeth.' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuvagte- 'to apply saliva to', and mekegragh-'to smooth out or make even (with one's teeth)') (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:208); Elngaatall aqfaasimalghii uteghmun qiiv
\f1\b yukagh
\f0\b0 penani.'He ran hard back home without even 
\f1\b making a move
\f0\b0  toward turning around (to look back).' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiive- 'to turn around') (AKIINGQWAGH. 54)	set (be all ~ to V)	make a move toward V-ing								about (be ~ to V)			to be ready to V; to be about to V; to be all set to V; to make a move toward V-ing		pb PY yuka3-					yukagh	yukagh	-\uc0\u1102 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuke-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -/rs-\'a1	feel V toward		
\f2\i used with emotional roots (equivalent in meaning to
\f0\i0  ~\'96ke-\super 2\nosupersub ) 
\f2\i and certain other verb bases;
\f0\i0  yimiyukaa \'91he feels intimidated by her\'92 (
\f2\i alternative to
\f0\i0  yimikaa; 
\f2\i from emotional root
\f0\i0  yimi- \'91intimidated\'92); ineqsukaa \'91he finds it (baby) attractive\'92 (
\f2\i from the root 
\f0\i0 ineqe- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  iinqe- \'91to coo a baby\'92); nenglaghyukaa \'91he laughed at it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nenglagh- \'91to laugh\'92); piyukaa \'91he wants it, likes it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pi- \'91to do, act\'92)	toward (V or feel V ~)												to feel V toward; to V toward							yuke1	yuke1	-\uc0\u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -1\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuke-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -/rs-\'99	think that one is V-ing or has V-ed		
\f2\i used only in narratives (?); this a \'93compound verbal\'94 postbase									
\f0\i0 needs examples				to think that one is V-ing or has V-ed				from de Reusse			yuke2	yuke2	-\uc0\u1102 \u1082 \u1099 -2\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuneghtu-	
\f0\b0 -/ys5ne-	love to V		ilagaghyuneghtuuq \'91he loves to sing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ilagagh- \'91to sing\'92); kiyaghsuneghtuut maani \'91they tend to stay here a lot\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiyaghte- \'91to stay\'92); Qikmighput qilug
\f1\b yuneghtu
\f0\b0 pigtuq. \'91Our dog really 
\f2\i loves
\f0\i0  to bark.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 143) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qilug- \'91to bark\'92)													to love to V		< -yug-neghtu-					yuneghtu	yuneghtu	-\uc0\u1102 \u1085 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuwhaagh-	
\f0\b0 -01]64-	first V		Saavlankutgun angyagh
\f1\b yuwhaagh
\f0\b0 tunga. \'91The 
\f1\b first time
\f0\b0  I  hunted by boat was with Saavla\'92s boat.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyagh- \'91to go hunting by boat\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:180); Neghsaghllaguyaghpetughnguq qazigyameng neli
\f1\b yuwhaagh
\f0\b0 aqngameng. \'91They said that there were lots of spotted seal while they were 
\f1\b first
\f0\b0  establishing a home [there].\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neli- \'91to establish (a) household(s)\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:234); = -yuggaagh-	beginning (V in the ~)												to first V; to V in the beginning							yuwhagh	yuwhxgh	-\uc0\u1102 \u772 \u1265 \u1100 \u257 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuwhaaq	
\f0\b0 -/1]62	first one to V		Dr. Jackson yusqughhaaguq piinlighi
\f1\b yuwhaagh
\f0\b0 tevut ugpeghmeng, maakenllu quyngimeng. \'91Dr. Jackson was a little man, the 
\f1\b first
\f0\b0  one to intruduce us to Christianity and from then to reindeer (herding).\'92 (from piinlighi- \'91to provide a beginning, to introduce\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:50); pangeghsuwhaalqa \'91my first trip to Chukotka\'92; = -yuggaaq													first one to V							yuwhaq	yuwhxq	-\uc0\u1102 \u1265 \u1100 \u257 \u1179 \
?fkagh-	-arf4-	cause one to V		
\f2\i non-productive;
\f0\i0  tuqufkaghtuq \'91he knocked himself out\'92, tuqufkaghaa \'91he knocked him out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqu- \'91to die\'92); ukifkaghaa \'91he punctured it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uki- \'91to get a hole\'92)													to cause one to V		PE -vka3- \'91cause or let\'92				?fkagh-	fkagh	fkagh	-\uc0\u1092 \u1082 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub ngiighhaq*	
\f0\b0 -375f2	small N		
\f2\i used only withvowel-ending bases; with consonant-ending bases the postbase
\f0\i0  -ghhaq 
\f2\i (q.v.) is used instead; 
\f0\i0 yaywaalingiighhaq \'91little orphan\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yaywaali \'91orphan\'92); nengiighhaq \'91little place\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  na\super e\nosupersub  \'91place\'92); iiyngiighhaq \'91little eye\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iya\super e\nosupersub  \'91eye\'92); nenglungiighhaq \'91small sod house\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nenglu \'91sod house\'92); sangiighhaq \'91small thing, small amount\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sa \'91thing, something\'92)	little N												small N; little N		< -?-ghhaq      				
\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub ngiighhaq*	
\f0\b0 ngighhaq	ngxghhaq	-\uc0\u1187 \u1251 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96fqagh-/\'96fqaa-	-a2f4- - -a26-	without V-ing		
\f2\i used with what are essentially possessed relative endings in place of 
\f0\i0 -gpe- 
\f2\i and the subordinative with
\f0\i0  -na- 
\f2\i (rather than
\f0\i0  -lu-
\f2\i ) to mean
\f0\i0  \'91not V-ing\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91without V-ing\'92;
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 qavafqaami \'91without sleeping\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); 
\f2\i also constitutes a negative optative, with ending agreeing with subject for intransitive, and object for transitive; 
\f0\i0 neghefqaavek \'91don't eat!\'92; neghefqaan don't eat it!\'92; neghefqiita \'91don't eat them!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *neghefqaghan 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  *neghefqaghita); kenifqaama \'91don't point at me!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kenigh- \'91to point at\'92)	don\'92t V												without V-ing; don't V		pb PY-S v0(k0)-				\'96fqagh-/\'96fqaa-	fqagh	fqagh	-\uc0\u1092 \u1179 \u1072 \u1271 - - -\u1092 \u1179 \u257 -\
+fte-/+pete-	-ans- - -gsns-	evidently V or have V-ed		
\f2\i indicates that the speaker did not actually directly observe what he is reporting (thus the English word 
\f0\i0 \'91evidently\'92 
\f2\i might be too strong a translation); the form
\f0\i0  -fte- 
\f2\i is used with vowel-ending bases, and the form
\f0\i0  -pete- 
\f2\i is used with consonant ending bases (in the variant,
\f0\i0  (pete) 
\f2\i is used with consonant-ending bases); 
\f0\i0 panikeftan \'91evidently she is your daughter\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  panike- \'91to have as one's daughter\'92); utaqiigaqeftuq \'91evidently she is waiting for someone\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  utaqiigaqe- \'91to be waiting for someone\'92); iyataghpetuq (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  iyataghpeteftuq) \'91evidently he is hungry\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iyatagh- \'91to be hungry\'92); maqallaghllaguftuq \'91it turned out to have a lot of algae\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  maqallghllak \'91(one having) lots of algae\'92) Taawa neqekranglaghvilgu
\f1\b ft
\f0\b0 ut. Tanemlleqa tawani neqekrangllaghvigitnun
\f1\b  
\f0\b0 gaaghvigu
\f1\b ft
\f0\b0 uq. \'91
\f1\b Evidently
\f0\b0  they had a bakery. And 
\f1\b evidently
\f0\b0  it was a place to \'93cook\'94 their bread.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:214); 
\f2\i may be used with the verb of a "because" clause headed by the particle
\f0\i0  qayughllak \'91because\'92, 
\f2\i when what the main clause says is the primary evidence for that which is indicated by the "because" clause: 
\f0\i0 ingaghtuq qayughllak qavaghniftuq \'91he lay down because (evidently) he was sleepy\'92; 
\f2\i a variant is 
\f0\i0 +(pete)fte-: iteghpeteftuq \'91evidentally he went in\'92 (
\f2\i variant of
\f0\i0  iteghpetuq) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to go\'92)													to evidently V or have V-ed; to turn out to (be) V						+fte-/+pete-	fte	fte	-\uc0\u1092 \u1090 \u1099 - - -\u1087 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b ~\sub f\nosupersub ughtagh-	
\f0\b0 -e5nf4-	all (V ~ things available)		
\f2\i probably non-productive; used only with bases that end in
\f0\i0  e; neghughtaghaa \'91he ate it all\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); uguqughtaghtuq \'91he got badly burned\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uguqe- \'91to get burned\'92); ungangughtaghtuq \'91he caught a lot of sea mammals\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  unange- \'91to catch sea mammal(s)\'92)	completely V												to V all things available; to V completely							ughtagh	ughtagh	-\uc0\u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
~+(g)aqe-	-\'f8u\uc0\u960 f2s-	currently V-ing (be ~)		
\f2\i yields a kind of \'93imperfective\'94  indicating repeated or ongoing action; this is in contrast to the form without this postbase which implies a \'93past perfective\'94; examples: 
\f0\i0 qiyaaquq \'91he cries (repeatedly, now and then, or whenever certain conditions are present)\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is crying (at the present time)\'92 (
\f2\i vs.
\f0\i0  qiyaaq \'91he cried\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); neghaqaa \'91he eats it\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is eating it\'92 (
\f2\i vs. 
\f0\i0 neghaa \'91he ate it\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); kaataquq \'91he arrives\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is at this time  arriving\'92 (
\f2\i vs.
\f0\i0  kaatuq \'91he arrived\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); laalightaqaa \'91he visits her\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is visiting her\'92 (
\f2\i vs.
\f0\i0  laalightaa \'91he visited her\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laalighte- \'91to visit\'92); qavaghaquq \'91he sleeps\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is sleeping\'92 (
\f2\i vs. 
\f0\i0 qavaghtuq \'91he slept\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); aatghaquq \'91he goes down\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is in the act of going down\'92 (
\f2\i vs. 
\f0\i0 ateghtuq \'91he went down\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ategh- \'91to go down\'92); neghyugaquq \'91he wants to eat\'92 (
\f2\i vs. 
\f0\i0 neghyugtuq \'91he wanted to eat\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghyug- \'91to want to eat\'92); nenglaghaquq \'91he laughs\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he is laughing\'92 (
\f2\i vs.
\f0\i0  nenglaghtuq \'91he laughed\'92); nenglaghaqluni \'91laughing now and then\'92; quunpeng nenglaghaquq \'91he always laughs\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nenglagh- \'91to laugh\'92); tagineghmini maavek iyataghaquq \'91whenever he comes here he is (regularly) hungry\'92; 
\f2\i the
\f0\i0  g 
\f2\i of this postbase is used only with bases ending in two vowels:
\f0\i0   aviigaquq \'91his ears ring (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  are ringing)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  avii- \'91to have ringing ears\'92); 
\f2\i see also the postbase
\f0\i0  -(ng)igate- 
\f2\i the negative of this postbase	
\f0\i0 now and then V	always V											to be currently V-ing; to V now and then (
\f2\i with the subordinative
\f0\i0 ); to always V (
\f2\i with particle
\f0\i0  quunpeng)		pb PE 9a3- and 9aq0-				~+(g)aqe-	gaqe	gaqe	-(\uc0\u1075 )\u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
@~\'96(g)kaa-	-\'f8[\uc0\u960 r6-	have V-ed		
\f2\i for details of attachment see  
\f0\i0 -(g)ka
\f2\i ; underlyingly the present postbase is 
\f0\i0 -(g)kau- 
\f2\i which is apparent from the labialization of a following consonant where possible; 
\f0\i0 qiyakaaguq \'91he has cried\'92, kina qiyakaawa? \'91who has cried?\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); neghegkaaguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neqaaguq \'91he has eaten; it has been eaten\'92 (
\f2\i from 
\f0\i0 negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92 ); kuufkaaguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kuuvegkaaguq \'91it has been spilled\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill\'92); taaqegkaaguq \'91he has quit\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to quit\'92 ); kaatkaaguq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kaaskaaguq \'91he has arrived\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); ingaghtekaaguq \'91he has lain down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); qavaqaaguq \'91he has slept\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0   qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); neghyukaaguq \'91he had wanted to eat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0   neghyug- \'91to want to eat\'92); aatqaaguq \'91he has gone down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ategh- \'91to go down\'92 ); pangalkaaguq \'91it has run\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pangaleg- \'91to run (animal)\'92 ); 
\f2\i this postbase takes intransitive endings only; the corresponding postbase for transitive endings is 
\f0\i0 -(g)kaqe-	been V-ed (have been V-ed)												to have V-ed; to have been V-ed.		< -(g)kaq-(ng)u-				@~\'96(g)kaa-	gka	gkx	-(\uc0\u1093 )\u1082 \u257 -\
~\'96(g)kaayagh-	-\'f8[\uc0\u960 r6z4-	fruitlessly (have V-ed fruitlessly)		
\f2\i for details of attachment see postbase 
\f0\i0 -(g)ka; tagikaayaghtuq \'91he came but. . .\'92  (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come;); neghegkaayaghaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neghegkaqsaghaa \'91he ate it in vain\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- to eat\'92); iitqaayaghtuq \'91he entered in vain\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to enter\'92); esghaqaayaghaa (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  esghaqaqsaghaa) \'91he saw it in vain\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  esghagh- \'91to see\'92); 
\f2\i when used with transitive endings the postbase the postbase
\f0\i0  \'96(g)kaqsagh- 
\f2\i (q.v.) is often used instead of this one	
\f0\i0 vian (have V-ed in vain)	but (have V-ed but. . . .)											to have V-ed fruitlessly; to have V-ed in vain; to have V-ed but. . . .		< -(g)kaa-yagh-				~\'96(g)kaayagh-	gkayagh	gkxyagh	-(\uc0\u1093 )\u1082 \u257 \u1103 \u1271 -\

\f1\b @~\'96(g)ka\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -\'f8[\uc0\u960 rfs	one(s) possessor is V-ing		
\f2\i used only with possessed endings; 
\f0\i0 tuguken \'91the one you are taking\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tugu- \'91to take\'92); neghyuken \'91the one you want to eat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghyug- \'91to want to eat\'92); esghaqen \'91the one you see\'92 (
\f2\i from 
\f0\i0 esghagh- \'91to see\'92); g 
\f2\i of this postbase is used with bases that end in 
\f0\i0 e: kuuvegken \'91the one you are spilling\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill\'92; 
\f2\i but
\f0\i0  kuufken 
\f2\i may also be possible
\f0\i0 ); te 
\f2\i preceded by consonant usually does not take 
\f0\i0 g: amqeghteken \'91the one you are biting\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  amqeghte- \'91to bite\'92; 
\f2\i but 
\f0\i0 amqeghtegken 
\f2\i is also possible
\f0\i0 ); 
\f2\i non-negative
\f0\i0  te 
\f2\i preceded by a vowel usually becomes
\f0\i0  t 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  s: tuqusken 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tuqutken \'91the one you are killing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqute- \'91to kill\'92; 
\f2\i but
\f0\i0  tuqutegken 
\f2\i is also possible
\f0\i0 );
\f2\i  negative
\f0\i0  te 
\f2\i becomes
\f0\i0  l: neghenrilken \'91the one you are not eating\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghenghite- \'91to not eat\'92); g 
\f2\i is inserted before the ending
\f0\i0  -ka: esghaqegka \'91the one I see\'92; e 
\f2\i of this postbase becomes
\f0\i0  a 
\f2\i before
\f0\i0  ng: esghaqanga \'91the one he sees\'92;
\f2\i the morpheme that constitutes this postbase also constitutes the marker of a certain transitive (participial) verb mood with present (?) time implication, for example:
\f0\i0  esghaqen \'91you see it\'92 (
\f2\i as well as
\f0\i0  \'91the one you see\'92); esghaqegka \'91I see it\'92 (
\f2\i as well as
\f0\i0  \'91the one I see\'92); esghaqanga \'91he sees it\'92 (
\f2\i as well as
\f0\i0  \'91the one he sees\'92); esghaqanganga \'91he sees me\'92; esghaqangaten \'91he sees you\'92; esghaqevnga \'91you see me\'92; esghaqemken \'91I see you\'92; piniqenghilkanga \'91he doesn\'92t like him\'92 (
\f2\i as well as
\f0\i0  \'91the one he doesn\'92t like\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  piniqenghite- \'91to not like\'92); neghegkeka \'91I am eating it\'92 (
\f2\i as well as
\f0\i0  \'91the one I am eating\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); tuqutkanga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tuquskanga \'91he is killing it\'92 (
\f2\i as well as
\f0\i0  \'91the one I he is killing\'92)									disentangle the participial verb use of this morpheme with that of -kaq (q.v.)				the one(s) possessor is V-ing		pb PE k0(-)2				
\f1\b @~\'96(g)ka\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub gka	gka	-(\uc0\u1093 )\u1082 \u1072 \u1099 \
~\'96(g)kaq	-\'f8[\uc0\u960 rf2	one that has V-ed		inghukaq \'91picked berry; one who has picked berries\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  inghu- to pick berries); kuuvegkaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kuufkaq \'91something that has spilled\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill\'92); taaqegkaq \'91someone who has quit\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to quit\'92); neghegkaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neqaq \'91someone who has eaten; something that has been eaten\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); tuqutkaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tuquskaq \'91something killed\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqute- \'91to kill\'92); ingaghtekaq \'91one who has lain down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); qavaqaq \'91one who has slept\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); laakaq \'91one who has dug; something dug; a hole in the ground, snow or ice\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laag- \'91to dig\'92); ayghiqaq \'91something that has become set a certain way\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayghigh- \'91to become set\'92); 
\f2\i the morpheme that constitutes this postbase also constitutes the marker of a certain (participial) verb mood with a past time implication: 
\f0\i0 qavaqaq \'91he slept\'92 (
\f2\i as well as
\f0\i0  \'91the one who slept\'92), qavaqanga \'91I slept\'92, qavaqakut \'91we slept\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); esghaqan \'91you saw it\'92 (
\f2\i as well as
\f0\i0  \'91the thing you saw\'92), esghaqamken \'91I saw you\'92, esghaqaghpenga \'91you saw me\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  esghagh- \'91to see\'92); 
\f2\i cf. postbase
\f0\i0  -aq	been V-ed (one that has ~)												one that has V-ed; one that has been V-ed		pb PE ka3				~\'96(g)kaq	gkaq	gkaq	-(\uc0\u1093 )\u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
@~\'96(g)kaqe-	-\'f8[\uc0\u960 r62s-	have V-ed (him/it)		esghaqaqanka \'91I have seen them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  esghagh- \'91to see\'92); liitkaqaten 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  liiskaqaten \'91you have learned them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  liite- \'91to learn\'92); neghegkaqaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neqaqaa \'91he has eaten it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghe- \'91to eat\'92); 
\f2\i this postbase takes transitive endings only; the orresponding postbase for intransitive endings is
\f0\i0  -(g)kaa- 
\f2\i (q.v.)	
\f0\i0 been V-ed (have been V-ed)												to have V-ed (him/it)						@~\'96(g)kaqe-	gkaqe	gkaqe	-(\uc0\u1093 )\u1082 \u257 \u1179 \u1099 -\
~\'96(g)kaqsagh-	-\'f8[\uc0\u960 rf2cz4-	fruitlessly (have V-ed fruitlessly)		esghaqaqsaghaa \'91he saw it in vain\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0   esghagh- \'91to see\'92); 
\f2\i when used with inransitive endings the postbase
\f0\i0   \'96(g)kaayagh- 
\f2\i (q.v.) is used instead	
\f0\i0 vian (have V-ed in vain)	but (have V-ed but. . . .)											to have V-ed fruitlessly; to have V-ed in vain; to have V-ed but. . . .		< -(g)kaq-ke\super 1\nosupersub -yagh-				~\'96(g)kaqsagh-	gkaqsagh	gkaqsagh	-(\uc0\u1093 )\u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
~\'96(g)kayugu-	-\'f8[\uc0\u960 rf/ue-	able (be ~ to V)		qiyakayuguuq \'91he can cry\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); neghegkayuguuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neqayuguuq \'91he can eat\'92; neghegkayugaa \'91he can eat it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); aqfaatkayuguuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aqfaaskayuguuq \'91he can run\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqfaate- \'91to run\'92); laalightekayuguuq \'91he can visit\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laalighte- \'91to visit\'92); pugimaqayuguuq \'91he can swim\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pugimagh- \'91to swim\'92); ilagaqayuguuq \'91he can sing hymns\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ilagagh- \'91to sing hymns\'92); iitqayuguuq \'91he can go in\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to go in\'92)	can V												to be able to V; can V		< -kayuk-(ng)u-				~\'96(g)kayugu-	gkayugu	gkayugu	-(\uc0\u1093 )\u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 -\
~\'96(g)kayugughte-	-\'f8[\uc0\u960 rf/ue5ns-	able (become ~ to V)		aqfaatkayuguuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aqfaaskayugughtuq \'91he has become able to run\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqfaate- \'91to run\'92)	can V												to become able to V		< -kayuk-(ng)u-				~\'96(g)kayugughte-	gkayugughte-	gkayugughte-	-(\uc0\u1093 )\u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1075 \u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
~\'96(g)kayuk	-\'f8[\uc0\u960 rf/r	readily (one that V-s ~)		aghulakayuguk \'91one who is able to dance\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghula- \'91to dance\'92)	able (one that is ~ to V)												one that V-s readily; one who is able to V		pb PE kayu!(-)				~\'96(g)kayuk	gkayak	gkayak	-(\uc0\u1093 )\u1082 \u1072 \u1102 \u1082 \
-gaq*				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b \'96ghaq*													
\f0\b0 young N; baby N; little N; one like N						\'96ghaq*	gaq	gaq	\
-ggalek				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96ghhalek													
\f0\b0 how V it is!; how much N it has!						
\f1\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96ghhalek	
\f0\b0 ggalek	ggalek	\
-ggaq*				
\f2\i see \'96
\f1\i0\b ghhaq*													
\f0\b0 little N; small N; bit of N						\'96ghhaq*	ggaq	ggaq	\
?(gh/l)i-	-\'f84-k\uc0\u960 b-	become V		
\f2\i non-productive; attachment pattern not entirely predictable; used with adjectival bases; examples: 
\f0\i0 takelliiq \'91it got shorter\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized; paradoxically from the root
\f0\i0  take- 
\f2\i as in 
\f0\i0 taake- \'91to be long \'91, 
\f2\i but note also
\f0\i0  takestaaghhaq, 'short thing'); angliiq \'91he grew\'92 (
\f2\i from the root
\f0\i0  ange- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  aange- \'91to be big\'92); pinighiiq \'91it got better\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pinigh- \'91to be good\'92); metughiiq \'91it grew louder\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  metu- \'91to be loud\'92 ); teggiiq 'it hardened, stiffened' (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  tegge- 'hard'); sukaghiiq \'91he/it has become fast\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  suka- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  sukatuq \'91he/it is fast\'92 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  sukaghhalek \'91so fast!)													become V		pb PE li-2				?(gh/l)i-	ghli	ghli	-(\uc0\u1271 -\u1083 )\u1080 -\
\'96ghaq*	-4f2	young N		
\f2\i non-productive; forms with this postbase are generally lexicalized; 
\f0\i0 aghnaghaq \'91girl\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghnaq \'91woman\'92); kaviighaq \'91young fox\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaviiq \'91fox\'92); qikmighaq \'91puppy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); afsengaghaq \'91baby mouse\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  afsengaq \'91mouse\'92); naayvaghaq \'91little lake\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naayvaq \'91lake\'92); kiiwaq \'91little river; creek\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiikw \'91river\'92); itegaq \'91foot\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itek \'91toe cap of boot\'92); amighaq \'91skin prepared for a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  amiq \'91skin\'92); ateghaq \'91alternate name\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ateq \'91name\'92); manughaq \'91front of house\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  manu \'91front\'92); qesighaq \'91mist\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qesiq \'91spittle\'92); qiipaghaq \'91cloth; cloth cover parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiipaq \'91thread\'92); 
\f2\i possibly also,
\f0\i0  ighneghaq \'91intestine\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighneq \'91son\'92, 
\f2\i though the semantic connection is not clear)
\f0\i0  	baby N	little N								one like N			young N; baby N; little N; one like N		pb PE a3				\'96ghaq*	ghaq	ghaq	-\uc0\u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
-ghha-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96gga-/~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96ghha-													
\f2\i\b0 command or request former						
\f1\i0\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96gga-/~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96ghha-	
\f0\b0 ghha	ghha	\
\'96ghhaq*	-5f2	little N		
\f2\i used (only?) with consonant-ending bases; with vowel-ending bases
\f0\i0  -ngiighhaq 
\f2\i (q.v.) is usually used instead; 
\f0\i0 aghnaghhaq \'91little woman\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghnaq \'91woman\'92); qikmiq \'91dog\'92 qikmighhaq \'91little dog\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); kiiwhaq \'91little river\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiikw \'91river\'92); meghhaq \'91small area of open water in ice field\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92)              	small N	bit of N											little N; small N; bit of N		pb PE 3a3 and a3a3				\'96ghhaq*	ghhaq	ghhaq	-\uc0\u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
-ghi-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ?(gh/l)i-													
\f0\b0 become V						?(gh/l)i-	ghi	ghi	\
\'96ghllag-	-5k]fu-	big way (V or be V in a ~)		qavaghllaghtuq \'91he's sleeping deeply or for a long time\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); aangeghllagtuq \'91it is very big\'92; Pakinegyaghtuq, meghmun nagne
\f1\b ghllag
\f0\b0 tuq ima! \'91In vain did he dig in his claws, but he plunged 
\f1\b right on
\f0\b0  toward the water there!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nagnegh- \'91to  move on despite obstacles\'92) (AYUM. UNGIP. I:7)	long time (V for a ~)												to V or be V in a big way; to V for a long time		pb 3@a!				\'96ghllag-	ghllag	ghllag	-\uc0\u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1075 -\
\'96ghllagu-	-5k]fue-	very (be ~ V)		iyataghllaguunga \'91I am very hungry\'92; iyataghllawaa? \'91is he very hungry?\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iyatagh- \'91to be hungry\'92 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *iyataghllagua); qepghaghllaguuq \'91he is very busy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92); Aghhutanga tamaaghhan neqekranglla
\f1\b ghllagu
\f0\b0 ftuq estugaghmeggnun, \'85 \'91Every day he was 
\f1\b busy
\f0\b0  baking bread for their store, \'85\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqekrangllagh- \'91to bake (make) bread\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:214)	busy V-ing												to be very V; to be busy V-ing		< -ghllag-(ng)u-				\'96ghllagu-	ghllagu	ghllagu	-\uc0\u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 -\
\'96ghllak	-5k]fr	big N		nunaghllak \'91big land\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuna \'91land\'92); tumeghllaget \'91big footprints\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91lots of footprints\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuma\super e\nosupersub  \'91footprint\'92); angyaghllak \'91big boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); atkugllak \'91big parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92); qiighwllalguuq \'91he has a lot of grey hair\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiiqw \'91grey hair\'92); kiiwhllagek \'91a little river\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiikw \'91river\'92); uughqaghtaghllak \'91big sea swell\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uughqaghtaq \'91sea swell\'92)	lots of N	large N											big N; large N; lots of N		pb PE 3@a!				\'96ghllak	ghllak	ghllak	-\uc0\u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1082 \
\'96ghnaggaq*	-4yf[f2	big N		iqallugnaggaq \'91big fish\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iqalluk \'91fish\'92); aghnalqwaaghnaggaq \'91big old woman\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghnalqaaq \'91old woman\'92)													big N						\'96ghnaggaq*	ghnaggaq	ghnaggaq	-\uc0\u1271 \u1085 \u1072 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
@\'96ghpagte-	-5gf[ns-	rapidly V 		igughpagtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  igughpagtaa \'91it jelled rapidly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igugh- \'91to jell\'92); nighughpagtuq \'91it twinkled\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nighugh- \'91to be bright\'92); suughpagtuq \'91it got dark (liquid)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  suugh- \'91to be murky\'92); puugpagtuq \'91it burst into flames\'92 
\f2\i (from unidentified base, but cf. 
\f0\i0 puugpak \'91match\'92); nengpagtuq \'91he became suddenly angry, jerked the rope, yanked on something; it suddenly tightened\'92 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  nengsugpagtuq \'91he strained a muscle\'92 
\f2\i (both irregularly from
\f0\i0  nenge- \'91to stretch, tighten\'92); 
\f2\i drops  base-final
\f0\i0  te: nuugpagtuq \'91it made a sudden move\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuugte- \'91to move\'92); amqeghpagtuq \'91it froze suddenly\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  amqeghte- \'91to bite\'92); igughpagtuq \'91it jelled rapidly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igugh(te)- \'91to jell)	suddenly V	major way (V in a ~)											to V rapidly, suddenly or in a major way		< -ghpak-?-				@\'96ghpagte-	ghpagte	ghpagte	-\uc0\u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96ghpak	-5gfr	big N		
\f2\i marginally productive; the following all more or less lexicalized: 
\f0\i0 angyaghpak \'91ship\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); miksagaghpak \'91four-year old bull walrus\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  miksagaq \'91bull walrus\'92); pagunghaghpak \'91prune\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pagunghaq \'91crowberry\'92); yugpak \'91huge person, giant\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92); awataghpak \'91sealskin float\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  *avataq 
\f2\i proto-Eskimo
\f0\i0  \'91float\'92); mayeraaghpak \'91giant\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  maya\super e\nosupersub  \'91heap\'92 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  -raaq \'91strange\'92); qawaagpak \'91eagle; legendary large bird that can carry off people\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qawaak \'91bird\'92); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 -pag-/-vag-	huge N	large N											big N; huge N; large N		pb PE va!(-)				\'96ghpak	ghpak	ghpak	-\uc0\u1203 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
-ghpe-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b \'96gpe-													
\f0\b0 not V-ing						\'96gpe-	ghpe	ghpe	\

\f1\b \'96ghqe-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -52s-\'a1	divide into N groups		
\f2\i used with numerical words; 
\f0\i0 maalghughqut \'91they divided into two groups\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  maalghuk \'91two\'92); Aqelqaghniighet apeghiineghmeggni enraq kalleghteghllaneghmeggni pingayu
\f1\b ghqe
\f0\b0 lluteng. \'91After the competitive events with the guests there were big, exciting ball games 
\f1\b in
\f0\b0  three 
\f1\b different places
\f0\b0 .\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pingayut \'91three\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:138)													to divide into N groups		pb PY q0-				
\f1\b \'96ghqe-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ghqe1	ghqe1	-\uc0\u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -1\

\f1\b \'96ghqe-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -52s-\'99	apply N to		
\f2\i probably non-productive; 
\f0\i0 meghqaa \'91he put water on it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92); mesiighqaa \'91he put oil on it, made it oily\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mesiiq \'91oil)													to apply N to		pb PE 3q0-				
\f1\b \'96ghqe-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ghqe2	ghqe2	-\uc0\u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -2\

\f1\b \'96ghqe-\super 3	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -52s-\'a3	cause to V		
\f2\i probably non-productive; 
\f0\i0 aqnighqaa \'91he caused her to be in pain, hurt her\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqnigh- \'91to be in pain\'92); kakeggmillaghqaa \'91he gave her a nosebleed\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kakegte- \'91to have a nosebleed\'92 
\f2\i and an intervening postbase
\f0\i0 ); neghqaa \'91he fed it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92)									more examples needed				to cause to V		pb PE 3q0-				\'96ghqe-\super 3	\nosupersub ghqe3	ghqe3	-\uc0\u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -3\
\'96ghqu-	-52s-	go to get N or to get something from N		angyaghquuq \'91he went to get a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); meghquuq \'91he went to get water\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92); atkugkuuq \'91he went to get a parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92); repaghquuq \'91he went to get a hammer\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  repa \'91hammer\'92); siqlugaghquuq \'91he went to get something from the underground meat cellar\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  siqlugaq \'91underground meat cellar\'92)	get (go to ~ N or to ~ something from N)												to go to get N or to get something from N						\'96ghqu-	ghqu	ghqu	-\uc0\u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
\'96ghquute-	-528ns-	encounter N		
\f2\i used with weather nouns and some others:  
\f0\i0 qanighquutuq \'91he encountered snow\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qanik \'91snow\'92); meghquutuq \'91he fell into the water\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92); allaghquutuq \'91he missed the spot he aimed at; he arrived earlier than planned\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alla \'91(an)other\'92); 
\f2\i the 
\f0\i0 ghq 
\f2\i of this postbase stays as is even with bases ending in
\f0\i0  g; eslallughquutuq \'91he encountered rain\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  eslalluk \'91rain\'92)	come when there is N												to encounter N; to come where there is N						\'96ghquute-	ghqute	ghqxte	-\uc0\u1203 \u1179 \u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96ghraag-	-4h6u-	do some V-ing		angyaghraagtuq \'91he is doing some hunting by boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyagh- \'91to hunt by boat\'92); meghraagtuq \'91it is crystal clear\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92); ghevraagtuq \'91it is pale\'92 (
\f2\i irregularly from 
\f0\i0 gheve- \'91to fade\'92); aqlaghaghraagtuq \'91it is somewhat cold\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqlagha \'91cold air\'92); aastughraagtuq \'91it is getting wider\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aastu- \'91to be wide\'92); ighivaghraagtuq \'91twilight is gradually approaching\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighivagh- \'91for night to fall\'92); iqallugteghraagtuq \'91he gradually got a lot of fish\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iqallugte- \'91to catch fish\'92); kiiveghraagtuq \'91it abated\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiive- \'91to settle\'92); mamlegraagtuq \'91it is partly dark\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mamleg- \'91to be dark\'92; pinighraagtuq \'91it is somewhat better\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pinigh- \'91to be good\'92); ghevraag- \'91to be somewhat pale\'92 (
\f2\i irregularly from
\f0\i0  gheve- \'91to fade\'92) Taawa liigike
\f1\b ghraag
\f0\b0 aghput nani kiyaghtekaatangi yuget, qavngaghtaatangillu. \'91We 
\f1\b kind of
\f0\b0  know now where the people lived and when they lived too.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:4)	somewhat V or like N	gradually V							check to see if this postbase is -ghraag- or -ghraagte-; we have it the second way with mamleg-; there may be two postbases here	get V-er			to do some V-ing; to be somewhat V or like N; to gradually V; to get V-er; to be somewhat V						\'96ghraag-	ghrag	ghrxg	-\uc0\u1271 \u1088 \u257 \u1075 -\
\'96ghrug-	-4heu-	big old one V-s		Anipa tenge
\f1\b ghrug
\f0\b0 umalghii ima. \'91Then 
\f1\b poor ol\'92 
\f2\i\b0 owl 
\f0\i0 took off in flight.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tenge- \'91to fly off\'92) (AKIINGQWAGH. 2)	poor old one V-s								needs more examples				big old one V-s		pb PE 9u!				\'96ghrug-	ghrug	ghrug	-\uc0\u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 -\
\'96ghrugllak	-4he[k]fr	big N		mangteghaghrugllak \'91big house\'92, mangteghaghrugllaget \'91very big houses\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangteghaq \'91house\'92)	large N												big N; large N		< -ghruk-ghllak				\'96ghrugllak	ghrugllak	ghrugllak	-\uc0\u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1093 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1082 \
\'96ghruk	-4her	big old N		angyaghruk \'91big old boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92; yugruk \'91big old person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92); = -ruk	poor old N												big old N; poor old N		pb PE 9u!				\'96ghruk	ghruk	ghruk	-\uc0\u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
\'96ghrukutaaghllak	-4heren65k]z2	huge N		mangteghaghrukutaaghllaget \'91gigantic houses\'92	gigantic N												huge N; gigantic N		< -ghrukutaaq-ghllak				\'96ghrukutaaghllak	ghrukutaghllak	ghrukutxghllak	-\uc0\u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u1179 \
\'96ghrukutaaq	-4heren62	big N		yugrukutaaq \'91great big man\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91man, person\'92); nenglughrukutaaq \'91great big semi-subterranean house\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nengu \'91semi-subterranean house\'92); quyngighrukutaaq \'91great big reindeer\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  quyngiq \'91reindeer\'92)	large N	huge N											big N; large N; huge N				< ghruk-?		\'96ghrukutaaq	ghrukutaq	ghrukutxq	-\uc0\u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \u1091 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
\'96ghrupak	-4hegfr	darned old N											need better gloss and examples				darned old N		< -ghruk-?				\'96ghrupak	ghrupak	ghrupak	-\uc0\u1271 \u1088 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1082 \
+ghsi	-5cb	
\f2\i vocative plural for demonstratives		perhaps better described as a noun case than a postbase;
\f0\i0  
\f2\i used with non-singular demonstrative pronoun bases; 
\f0\i0 ukughsi \'91you (plural), right here!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uku- 
\f2\i as in 
\f0\i0 ukut \'91these right here\'92, 
\f2\i plural of 
\f0\i0  una \'91this right here\'92); maakughsi \'91you (plural), in this area!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  maaku- as in \'91these around here\'92, 
\f2\i plural of
\f0\i0  maana \'91this around here\'92)													
\f2\i plural vocative for demonstratives						
\f0\i0 +ghsi	ghsi	ghsi	-\uc0\u1203 \u1089 \u1080 \
\'96ghte-	-5ns-	become V		
\f2\i non-productive (or semi-productive); 
\f0\i0 aqlaghaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  aqlaghaghtaa \'91it became cold\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqlagha \'91coldness in the air\'92); nutaghaghtuq \'91it became new\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0  nutagh- \'91newness\'92 
\f2\i as in 
\f0\i0 nutaghaq \'91new thing\'92); nuqutughtuq \'91it got wide(r)\'92, nuqutughtaa \'91he made it wide(r) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuqutu- \'91to be wide\'92); iqetughtuq \'91it widened\'92 (
\f2\i from 
\f0\i0  iqetu- \'91to be wide\'92); kavightuq \'91it reddened\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  kaviq \'91redness\'92, 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  kavite- \'91to be red\'92); qelmeghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qelmeghtaa \'91it became shiny\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qelmegh- \'91to be shiny\'92); tangeghtughtuq \'91it hardened\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tangeghtu- \'91to be hard\'92); muugaghtuq \'91it became sweet\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  muuga \'91sweetness\'92); segeghtuq \'91it became dry and brittle\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  segeq \'91dry, brittle wood\'92); qanlengightuq \'91it is starting to get closer\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qanlengi- \'91to get closer\'92)	acquire the quality N												to become V; to acquire the quality N						\'96ghte-	ghte	ghte	-\uc0\u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -\'f841-31-1\uc0\u960 64-\super \'a1	\nosupersub diligently V		ngw 
\f2\i is used with vowel-ending bases;
\f0\i0  inghungwaaghtuq \'91he's picking berries carefully and thoroughly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  inghu- \'91to pick berries\'92); ghw 
\f2\i is used with
\f0\i0  gh-
\f2\i ending bases;
\f0\i0   qepghaghwaaghtuq \'91he's working diligently\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92); w i
\f2\i s used with
\f0\i0  g-
\f2\i ending bases; 
\f0\i0 aallwaaghtuq \'91he's sweeping diligently and thoroughly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alleg- \'91to sweep\'92); pangalwaaghtuq \'91it is running around (on four legs)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pangaleg- \'91to run (on four legs)\'92); Igaghyamun apeghtughistengughte
\f1\b ngngwaagh
\f0\b0 luni Uugsima esghaghyaqevut. \'91Uugsima, who we had seen (back then), had, 
\f1\b in time
\f0\b0 , become teacher in the school.\'92 (PANGEGH. 36); 
\f2\i underlyingly  this postbase is 
\f0\i0 ~\'96(ng)uagh-; 
\f2\i contrast this postbase with 
\f0\i0 -(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 2\nosupersub , 
\f2\i which despite being homophonous has almost the opposite meaning	
\f0\i0 thoroughly V	proper time (V at the ~)								attentively V			to diligently V; to thoroughly V; to V at the proper time; to V attentively		pb PE &u9a3a3-				
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ghwngwwagh1	ghwngwwxgh1	-(\uc0\u1271 \u1265 -\u1187 \u1265 -\u1265 )\u257 \u1271 -1\

\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -\'f841-31-1\uc0\u960 64-\super \'99	\nosupersub non-serious (V in a ~ way)		inghungwaaghtuq \'91he played at picking berries\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  inghu- \'91to pick berries\'92); esghaghwaaghtuq \'91he had visions or halucinations\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  esghagh- \'91to see\'92); igaghwaaghtuq \'91he scribbled\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igagh- \'91to write\'92); 
\f2\i underlyingly this postbase is 
\f0\i0  ~\'96(ng)uagh-; 
\f2\i contrast this postbase with 
\f0\i0 -(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 1\nosupersub , 
\f2\i which despite being homophonous has almost the opposite meaning	
\f0\i0 pretend to V	play at V-ing								not the usual purpose (V for ~)			to V in a non-serious way; to pretend to V; to V for something other than the usual purpose; to play at V-ing						~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 2	\nosupersub ghwngwwagh2	ghwngwwxgh2	-(\uc0\u1271 \u1265 -\u1187 \u1265 -\u1265 )\u257 \u1271 -2\
~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aaq	-\'f841-31-1\uc0\u960 62	imitation N		nunangwaaq \'91little bit of land\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuna \'91land\'92); sikungwaaq \'91little bit of ice\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  siku \'91ice\'92); neqngwaaq \'91artificial food in any sense\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqa\super e  \nosupersub \'91food\'92); sigutngwaaq \'91imitation ear, thing like an ear\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sigun, siguta\super e\nosupersub  \'91ear\'92); qayaghwaaq \'91toy kayak, model of a kayak\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qayaq \'91kayak\'92); atkuwaaq \'91model or play parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92); aatghwaaq \'91pretend name, alias\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ateq \'91name\'92); 
\f2\i the following are lexicalized:
\f0\i0  ighneghwaaq \'91finger\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91toe\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighneq \'91son\'92); siqinghwaaq \'91shattered glass\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  siqineq \'91sun\'92); maklawaaq \'91caterpillar\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  maklak \'91bearded seal\'92); 
\f2\i underlyingly this postbase is 
\f0\i0 ~\'96(ng)uaq	thing like N	little bit of N or little thing like N								pretend N			imitation N; artificial N; model N; toy N; pretend N; little bit of N or little thing like N; thing like N		pb PE -(&)u9a3(-)				~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aaq	ghwngwwaq	ghwngwwxq	-(\uc0\u1271 \u1265 -\u1187 \u1265 -\u1265 )\u257 \u1179 \
-ghwaagh-\super 1				
\f2\i \nosupersub see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 1													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to diligently V; to thoroughly V; to V at the proper time						
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ghwagh1	ghwxgh1	\
-ghwaagh-\super 2				
\f2\i \nosupersub see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 2													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to V in a non-serious way; to pretend to V; to V for something other than the usual purpose; to play at V-ing						~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 2	\nosupersub ghwngwwagh2	ghwngwwxgh2	\
-ghwaaq				see 
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aaq													
\f0\b0 imitation N; artificial N; model N; toy N; pretend N; little bit of N; thing like N						~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aaq	ghwaq	ghwxq	\
-gku-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghqu-													
\f0\b0 to go to get N or to get something from N						\'96ghqu-	gku	gku	\
-gllag-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b \'96ghllag-													
\f0\b0 to V or be V in a big way; to V for a long time						\'96ghllag-	gllag	gllag	\
-gllagu-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghllagu-													
\f0\b0 to be very V; to be busy V-ing						\'96ghllagu-	gllagu	gllagu	\
-gllak				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghllak													
\f0\b0 big N; lots of N						\'96ghllak	gllak	gllak	\
-gnaggaq*				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghnaggaq*													
\f0\b0 big N						\'96ghnaggaq*	gnaggaq	gnaggaq	\
\'96gneq	-uys2	number (N (~) of things or groups)		
\f2\i used with a plural ending and therefore realized as 
\f0\i0 \'96gneghet, \'96gneghneng, 
\f2\i etc.; used on number bases from \'91two\'92 (in the form 
\f0\i0 malghu, 
\f2\i not
\f0\i0  maalghu) 
\f2\i on up, to indicate the number of things, the noun for which is used in the plural or dual even for a single entitity, or to indicate the number of groups (such as families); note that the 
\f0\i0 g 
\f2\i of this postbase always stays as 
\f0\i0 g; Malghu
\f1\b gnegh
\f0\b0 et siifluki unkuset ataasikaghsimalghiit kaviighmeng. \'91Setting 
\f1\b two
\f0\b0  traps, [they] caught [one] fox.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 151; 
\f2\i note that dual, 
\f0\i0 unkusek, 
\f2\i is used for one 
\f0\i0 \'91trap\'92); Pingayu
\f1\b gnegh
\f0\b0 et angyat. \'91[There were] 
\f1\b three
\f0\b0  boats with crew.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:122; 
\f2\i note that plural, 
\f0\i0 angyat, 
\f2\i is used for one
\f0\i0  \'91boat with crew\'92); Naaka pingayu
\f1\b gnegh
\f0\b0 neng qiipaghalek. \'91My mother had 
\f1\b three
\f0\b0  cloth cover parkas.\'92 (SULUWET 13; 
\f2\i note that dual, 
\f0\i0 qiipaghaak, 
\f2\i is used for one
\f0\i0  \'91cloth cover parka\'92); Taakwagun, qamiyet malghu
\f1\b gnegh
\f0\b0 et, \'85 \'91[For that first trip here] 
\f1\b two
\f0\b0  sleds [were used], \'85\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:156; 
\f2\i note that dual,
\f0\i0  qamiyek, 
\f2\i is used for one
\f0\i0  \'91sled\'92); Taakut Pugughileghmelnguut Agaankutlu, Anagutaankutlu malghu
\f1\b gnegh
\f0\b0 et. \'91Only 
\f1\b two
\f0\b0  families were staying permanently at Southwest Cape, Agaq and family, and  Anagutaq and family.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:162); Isiqaghlleghhangunaamta tamlaghqutkakut, estama
\f1\b gnegh
\f0\b0 ni angyani. \'91Without splashing we landed in 
\f1\b four
\f0\b0  boats.\'92 (PANGEGHTELLGHET 24; 
\f2\i note that plural, 
\f0\i0 angyat, 
\f2\i is used for a single
\f0\i0  \'91boat and crew\'92); \'85 mangteghat tallima
\f1\b gnegh
\f0\b0 et aliighumalghiit. \'91\'85 
\f1\b five
\f0\b0  houses had come into view.\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 20; 
\f2\i note that plural, 
\f0\i0 mangteghaq, 
\f2\i is used for one
\f0\i0  \'91house\'92); Taan'gavek ivenrughtukut elngaatall malghu
\f1\b gnegh
\f0\b0 uluta. \'91We went in 
\f1\b two
\f0\b0  [boats] 
\f2\i out to sea 
\f0\i0 using outboard motors.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:116)													N (number) of things; N (number) of groups						\'96gneq	gneq	gneq	-\uc0\u1075 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
-gpagte-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @\'96ghpagte-													
\f0\b0 to V rapidly, suddenly or in a major way						@\'96ghpagte-	gpagte	gpagte	\
-gpak				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b \'96ghpak													
\f0\b0 big N; huge N						\'96ghpak	gpak	gpak	\
\'96gpe-	-[gs-	not V-ing		
\f2\i replaces the negative postbase
\f0\i0  -nghite- 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  -llghite-, 
\f2\i when the subordinative mood is used; takes subordinative endings marked by
\f0\i0  -na-, 
\f2\i rather than those marked by
\f0\i0  -lu- 
\f2\i (and with person/number markers differing form the subordinative in
\f0\i0  -lu- 
\f2\i in several ways);
\f0\i0  neghegpenani \'91(he) not eating\'92 (
\f2\i which is the subordinate corresponding to indicative
\f0\i0  neghenghituq \'91he didn't eat\'92), neghegpenaan \'91(any subject) not eating it\'92, neghegpenaki \'91(any subject) not eating them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); ukigpenang \'91(you) not going down\'92 (
\f2\i which is the subordinate corresponding to indicative
\f0\i0  ukinghituten \'91you didn't go down\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ukig- \'91to go down\'92); qavaghpenanga \'91(I) not sleeping\'92 (
\f2\i which is the subordinate corresponding to indicative
\f0\i0  qavanghitunga \'91I didn't sleep\'92)(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 -ngu-													not V-ing		pb PY-S v0(k0)-				\'96gpe-	gpe	gpe	-\uc0\u1093 \u1087 \u1099 -\
-graag-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghraag-													
\f0\b0 to do some V-ing; to be somewhat V or like N; to gradually V; to get V-er; to be somewhat V						\'96ghraag-	grag	grxg	\
-grug-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghrug-									
\f0\b0 needs more examples				big old one V-s						\'96ghrug-	grug	grug	\
-grugllak				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghrug-													
\f0\b0 big N; large N						\'96ghrugllak	grugllak	grugllak	\
-gruk				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghruk													
\f0\b0 big old N; poor old N						\'96ghruk	gruk	gruk	\
-grukutaaghllak				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghrukutaaghllak													
\f0\b0 huge N; gigantic N						\'96ghrukutaaghllak	grukutaghllak	grukutxghllak	\
-grukutaaq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghrukutaaq													
\f0\b0 big N; large N; huge N						\'96ghrukutaaq	grukutaq	grukutxq	\
-grupak				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghrupak									
\f0\b0 need better gloss and examples				darned old N						\'96ghrupak	grupak	grupak	\
-i-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ?(gh/l)i-													
\f0\b0 become V						?(gh/l)i-	i	i	\

\f1\b ~+i-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -b-\'a1	something (V ~)		
\f2\i used with patientive and transitive-only verb bases and with intransitive endings (though it also has a (possibly vestigial) "adversative" use taking transitive endings as well; see Miyaoka 1984:215); 
\f0\i0 ifliiguq \'91he lost something\'92 (
\f2\i vs.
\f0\i0  iflaaq \'91he or it got lost\'92, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  iflaa \'91he lost it\'92)(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ifla- to \'91lose, get lost\'92); kuuviiq \'91he spilled something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill\'92); ingaghtiiq \'91he lay something down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down or lay (it) down\'92); tuqutiiq \'91he killed something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqute- \'91to kill\'92); sikungighiiq \'91he moved the ice from something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sikungigh- \'91to remove ice from (it)\'92) ; aavgiiq \'91he divided something in half\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aveg- \'91to divide in half, to divide (it) in half\'92); uumgiiq \'91he closed something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umeg- \'91to close\'92); 
\f2\i cf. the half-transitive use of postbase 
\f0\i0  -(u)te-	
\f2\i detransitivizing postbase	half-transitive postbase								
\f0\i0 suffer something\'92s V-ing			to V something; to suffer something\'92s V-ing; 
\f2\i detransitivizing postbase; half-transitive postbase		
\f0\i0 pb PE 9i-				
\f1\b ~+i-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub i1	i1	-\uc0\u1080 -1\

\f1\b \'96\'96i-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -b-\super \'99	\nosupersub make N		
\f2\i non-productive; drops both final consonant and the preceding vowel; 
\f0\i0 angyiiq \'91he made a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); suqiiq \'91he made baleen, removed the baleen from the whale\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  suqaq \'91baleen\'92); awataghpiiqa \'91I made it into a poke\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  awataghpak \'91poke\'92); kingiiq \'91he had part of his catch eaten by maggots\'92 (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , \'91he \'93made\'94 maggots\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kinguk \'91maggot\'92)													to make N		< -li-				
\f1\b \'96\'96i-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub i2	i2	-\uc0\u1080 -2\
-i:ghute-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~:(ng)i:ghute-													
\f0\b0 to become N-less; to have lost one's N						~:(ng)i:ghute-	ighute	ighute	\
@~:(i/u)ma-	-\'f8b-e\uc0\u960 vf-	have V-ed or been V-ed		
\f2\i verb bases ending in a full vowel use only 
\f0\i0 ma- 
\f2\i of this postbase:
\f0\i0  qiyamaaq \'91he has been crying\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92);
\f2\i verb bases ending in
\f0\i0  te 
\f2\i use
\f0\i0  i, 
\f2\i and change
\f0\i0  t 
\f2\i to
\f0\i0  s
\f2\i :  
\f0\i0 kaasimaaq \'91he has arrived\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); ingaghsimaaq \'91he has lain down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); 
\f2\i verb bases ending in
\f0\i0  e 
\f2\i not preceded by
\f0\i0  t 
\f2\i or ending in a consonant use
\f0\i0  u
\f2\i :
\f0\i0  kuuvumaaq \'91it has been spilled\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill\'92) (
\f2\i note also 
\f0\i0 kuvumaaq \'91it has been spilled around\'92) ; qavaamaaq \'91he has slept\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); sikungiimaaq \'91it has lost its ice\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sikungigh- \'91to lose ice\'92); mayuumaaq \'91it has gone up\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mayugh- \'91to go up\'92); aavgumaaq \'91it has been halved\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aveg- \'91to divide in half\'92); 
\f2\i with participial mood endings, this postbase yields forms indicating that evidently the action has occurred though without the speaker directly observing it, a construction very common in narratives; examples:
\f0\i0  aanumalghii \'91evidently he went out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92); neghumakanga \'91evidently he ate it\'92, neghumakegka \'91evidently I ate it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); esghaamakanganga \'91evidently he saw me\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  esghagh- \'91to see\'92); elngaatall seghletun kiyaghsimalghii \'91evidently he lived a very hard life\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiyaghte- \'91to live\'92); 
\f2\i note also the use of this postbase as a nominalizer: 
\f0\i0 maligqutaama \'91one who always follow the rules\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  maligqutagh- \'91to follow (the rules)\'92); qawaak naluguma \'91a landed bird\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nalug- \'91to land\'92)	state (be in a state of having V-ed or been V-ed)	evidently have V-ed or been V-ed											to have V-ed or been V-ed; to be in a state of having V-ed or been V-ed; with participial mood: to evidently have V-ed or been V-ed		pb PE (u)ma-				@~:(i/u)ma-	iuma	iuma	-(\uc0\u1080 -\u1091 )\u1084 \u1072 -\
@~:(i/u)mafte-	-\'f8b-e\uc0\u960 vfans-	how much subject evidently has V-ed!		qepghaamaftuq \'91how much he must have worked!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92)													how much subject evidently has V-ed!		< -(i/u)ma-fte-     				@~:(i/u)mafte-	iumafte-	iumafte-	-(\uc0\u1080 -\u1091 )\u1084 \u1072 \u1092 \u1090 \u1099 -\
@~:(i/u)magh-	-\'f8b-e\uc0\u960 vf4-	while V-ing		
\f2\i used only in the quantifier/qualifier construction; 
\f0\i0 imtuqiqumaghmi akuziiq \'91he was speaking while stuttering\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  imtuqiqe- \'91to stutter\'92); naghaaghumaghmeng pimalghiit tespagavek \'91while playing they went up there\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naghaagh- \'91to play\'92); piyugumaagmek saghnaak \'91while walking they\sub 2\nosupersub  gathered things\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  piyug- \'91to walk\'92)													while V-ing		pe (u)ma3(a3)				@~:(i/u)magh-	iumagh	iumagh	-(\uc0\u1080 -\u1091 )\u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -\
@~:(i/u)man	-\'f8b-e\uc0\u960 vfy	time while V-ing		
\f2\i takes unpossessed vialis endings; the subject of the embedded verb is not specifcally indicated; 
\f0\i0 qepghaamatkun \'91during the course of work, while working\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92); neghumatkun \'91while eating\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92)	course of V-ing												the time while V-ing; the course of V-ing		< -(i/u)ma-(u)n				@~:(i/u)man	iuman	iuman	-(\uc0\u1080 -\u1091 )\u1084 \u1072 \u1085 \
@~:(i/u)manginagh-	-\'f8b-e\uc0\u960 vf3byf4-	every time		Navek pi
\f1\b manginaq,
\f0\b0  ilanga tamaana sangllaq navek pingigalnguq. \'91People were
\f2\i  
\f1\i0\b always 
\f2\i\b0 g
\f0\i0 oing somewhere. Those who were not leaving the village were working on something.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pi- \'91to do, act\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:244); Esghalqugpenaannguq iyegni iigh
\f1\b umanginagh
\f0\b0 lukek, gginani iigh
\f1\b umanginagh
\f0\b0 luku. \'91 Not looking at her, 
\f1\b all the time
\f0\b0  hiding his eyes, 
\f1\b all the time
\f0\b0  hiding his face.\'92 (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:268)	whole time (the ~)												V-ing every time; V-ing the whole time		< -(i/u)ma-(ng)inagh-				@~:(i/u)manginagh-	iumanginagh	iumanginagh	-(\uc0\u1080 -\u1091 )\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
@~:(i/u)mangite-	-\'f8b-e\uc0\u960 vf3bns-	not have V-ed		neghumangituq \'91he hasn\'92t eaten\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92)													to not have V-ed		< -(i/u)ma-(ng)ite-				@~:(i/u)mangite-	iumangite	iumangite	-(\uc0\u1080 -\u1091 )\u1084 \u1072 \u1187 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
-igate-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(ng)igate-													
\f0\b0 to never V; to not be V-ing at the present time						@~:(ng)igate-	igate	igate	\
\'96\'96igh-	-b4-	provide with N		
\f2\i drops both final consonant and preceding vowel;
\f0\i0  kenighaa \'91he shined a light on it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  keneq \'91light\'92); ti 
\f2\i from this postbase does not become
\f0\i0  si: atighaa \'91he named it/him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ateq \'91name\'92); natighaa \'91she sewed a sole on it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nateq \'91sole\'92)													provide with N		< -ligh-				\'96\'96igh-	igh	igh	-\uc0\u1080 \u1271 -\
-igh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~:(ng)igh-													
\f0\b0 to lose N; to be injured in one's N; to remove N						~:(ng)igh-	igh-	igh-	\
\'96\'96ii-	-7-	cut up N		
\f2\i drops both final consonant and the preceding vowel; used with game animal nouns; 
\f0\i0 makliiguq \'91he is butchering  bearded seal\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  maklak \'91bearded seal\'92); aghviigut \'91they are butchering whale\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghveq \'91whale\'92); ayviiguq \'91he is butchering walrus\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayveq \'91walrus\'92)	butcher N	prepare N											to cut up N; to butcher N; to prepare N						\'96\'96ii-	i	x	-\uc0\u1251 -\
\'96\'96iigh-	-74-	fix N		1914-mi mangtegh
\f1\b iigh
\f0\b0 yuwhaallghitni legan kiigani. \'91In 1914 the first houses were 
\f1\b built
\f0\b0  there.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangteghaq \'91house\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:56)	make N	prepare N								cook N			to fix N; to make N; to prepare N; to cook N		< -liigh-				\'96\'96iigh-	igh	xgh	-\uc0\u1251 \u1271 -\
+iiraagh-	-7h64-	pretend by using N		angyaghiiraaghtuq \'91he is playing at boating, pretending to hunt with a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); aaghtiiraaghtuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  are arguing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aaghte- \'91to convince\'92); agaghtiiraagtuq \'91it is hanging\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  agaghte- \'91to hang\'92); kayaalqiiraaghutut \'91they are competing with each other\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kayaalqe- \'91to outdo, win\'92)	play at V-ing	keep on V-ing							need more examples and a better gloss				to pretend by using N; to play at V-ing; to keep on V-ing						+iiraagh-	iragh	xragh	-\uc0\u1251 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
-iitaq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~:(ng)iitaq													
\f0\b0 protective device for or like N; device to prevent V-ing						~:(ng)iitaq	itaq	xtaq	\
-ima-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~:(i/u)ma-													
\f0\b0 to have V-ed or been V-ed; to be in a state of having V-ed or been V-ed; with participial mood: to evidently have V-ed or been V-ed						@~:(i/u)ma-	ima	ima	\
-imafte-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(i/u)mafte-													
\f0\b0 how much subject evidently has V-ed!						@~:(i/u)mafte-	imafte-	imafte-	\
-imagh-				
\f2\i see at 
\f1\i0\b @~:(i/u)magh-													
\f0\b0 while V-ing						@~:(i/u)magh-	imagh	imagh	\
-iman				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~:(i/u)man													
\f0\b0 the time while V-ing; the course of V-ing						@~:(i/u)man	iman	iman	\
-imanginagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(i/u)manginagh-													
\f0\b0 V-ing every time; V-ing the whole time						@~:(i/u)manginagh-	imanginagh	imanginagh	\
-imangite-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(i/u)mangite-													
\f0\b0 to not have V-ed						@~:(i/u)mangite-	imangite	imangite	\
-inagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b :(ng)inagh-													
\f0\b0 to only V; to go right on V-ing						:(ng)inagh-	inagh	inagh	\
-inaq*				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~:(ng)inaq*													
\f0\b0 only N; just N; exactly N						~:(ng)inaq*	inaq	inaq	\
\'96\'96iqe-	-b2s-	deal with N		
\f2\i drops both final consonant and the preceding vowel; 
\f0\i0 imtuqiquq \'91he is stuttering\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  imtuqaq \'91stutter\'92); aqsiquq \'91he has a stomache\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqsa \'91stomach\'92); naasqiquq \'91he has a headache\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naasquq head\'92);  aqelqiquq \'91he has visitors\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqelqaq visitor\'92); naangqiquq \'91he's carving ivory\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naangquq \'91ivory\'92 ); nengaawiquq \'91he's working for his future  parents-in-law\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nengaawaq \'91man working for his future parents-in-law\'92); iqlengiquq \'91he tells lies\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iqlengagh- \'91to be a liar\'92); iyatiquq \'91he is starving\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iyatagh- \'91to be hungry\'92); qaviquq \'91he overslept\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); qiyiquq \'91he is crying on and off over a period of time\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); ti 
\f2\i from this postbase changes to
\f0\i0  si: ggusiquq \'91he has a toothache\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  gguta \'91tooth\'92); imtuqiquq \'91he is stuttering\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  imtuqaq \'91stuttering condition\'92); qakiqniquq \'91he is planning and preparing to go somewhere\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qakiqnaq \'91avid hunter\'92); riistuniquq \'91he\'92s overly parsimounious\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  riistuneq \'91sly, frugal person or animal\'92); 
\f2\i also may be present in the following derived from unidentified bases: 
\f0\i0  ighelleghyiqe- \'91to limp\'92; qefliqe- \'91to be angry (of men)\'92; agniqe- \'91to be angry (of women)\'92; sagiqe- \'91to persevere, to urge others on\'92; yeghyiqe- \'91to feel an aversion to certain foods\'92	work with N	pain (have ~ in one's N)								trouble (have ~ with one's N or with one\'92s V-ing over a period of time)			to deal with N; to work with N; to have pain in one's N; to have trouble with one's N; to have trouble with one's V-ing over a period of time		< -liqe-				\'96\'96iqe-	iqe	iqe	-\uc0\u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
-isag-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~:(ng)isag-													
\f0\b0 to lack N; to need N						~:(ng)isag-	isag-	isag-	\
-isug-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~:(ng)isug-													
\f0\b0 to have insufficient N						~:(ng)isug-	isug-	isug-	\
-kaa-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~\'96(g)kaa-													
\f0\b0 to have V-ed; to have been V-ed.		< -(g)kaq\super 1\nosupersub -(ng)u-				@~\'96(g)kaa-	ka	kx	\
-kaayagh-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~\'96(g)kaayagh-													
\f0\b0 to have V-ed fruitlessly; to have V-ed in vain; to have V-ed but. . . .						~\'96(g)kaayagh-	kayagh	kxyagh	\
-ka\super e				
\f2\i \nosupersub see 
\f1\i0\b @~\'96(g)ka\super e									
\f0\b0 \nosupersub disentangle the participial verb use of this morpheme with that of -kaq (q.v.)				the one(s) possessor is V-ing						
\f1\b @~\'96(g)ka\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ka	ka	\
-kagh-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~\'96qagh-													
\f0\b0 please V; just V; suddenly V; briefly						~\'96qagh-	kagh	kagh	\
@kaghaq	-rf4f2	small N		
\f2\i used with 
\f0\i0 te 
\f2\i ending bases; drops 
\f0\i0 te; ghhukaghaq \'91small commode\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ghhuta\super e\nosupersub  \'91old-style commode\'92); kelukaghakun \'91(through) the area a little ways back from the shore\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  keluta \'91area in back\'92); anighqukaghaq \'91small candle\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  anighqun \'91torch, candle, etc.); atalgukaghaq \'91little cousin\'92 (
\f2\i perhaps a special relationship ?
\f0\i0 ) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atalgun \'91cousin (parallel on father\'92s side)\'92)									more examples needed				small N		pb PY ka3aq				@kaghaq	kaghaq	kaghaq	-\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
-kaghaqe-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~\'96qaghaqe-													
\f0\b0 to intermittently V; to V now and then						~\'96qaghaqe-	kaghaqe	kaghaqe	\
~\'96kaghqaq	-rf5rf2	something to be used as N		angyaqaghqaq\'92 something to use as a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); atkukaghqaq \'91something to use as a parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92); naakaghqaq \'91stepmother\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naa \'91mother\'92); atakaghqaq \'91stepfather\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ata \'91father\'92); nekaghqaq \'91building site\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  na\super e\nosupersub  \'91home, place\'92)	future N												something to be used as N; future N		pb PE k9a3				~\'96kaghqaq	kaghqaq	kaghqaq	-\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
-kaghtagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96qaghtagh-													
\f0\b0 to continuously V with back and forth or up and down movement						~\'96qaghtagh-	kaghtagh	kaghtagh	\
+kaghtaq	-rf5nf2	one from N		
\f2\i used with demonstrative adverb bases; 
\f0\i0 akmakaghtaq \'91one from way across there\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akma- \'91way across there\'92); = +keghtaq													one from N						+kaghtaq	kaghtaq	kaghtaq	-\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
~\'96kaghte-	-rf5ns-	get N		
\f2\i used with nouns expressing quantity of game, money, etc.; 
\f0\i0 quulkaghtuq \'91he caught ten\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qula\super e\nosupersub  \'91ten\'92); \'91qafsinkaghta?\'92 how many did he get? (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qafsina\super e\nosupersub  \'91how many\'92)	catch N (game)												to get N; to catch N						~\'96kaghte-	kaghte	kaghte	-\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
~\'96kanigh-	-rfyb4-	rather (be ~ V)		ighlekanightuq \'91he is rather stingy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighleg- \'91to be stingy\'92); piniqanightuq \'91he is rather nice\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pinigh- \'91to be nice\'92); Tawavek tekeghaghllagmun itghut
\f1\b kanigh
\f0\b0 ii ukum tungangakun. \'91It [the current] drew them in 
\f1\b more and more
\f0\b0  to the large promontory, in its direction.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itghute- \'91to bring (it) in\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:122)	fairly (be ~ V)	more and more (V ~)											to be rather V; to be fairly V; to V more and more		pb PE kkanni3-				~\'96kanigh-	kanigh	kanigh	-\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
+kaq	-rf2	raw material for N or for V-ing		atkugkaq \'91parka material\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92); angyaghqaq \'91boat material\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); inghukaq \'91berry to be picked\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  inghu- \'91to pick berries\'92)													raw material for N or for V-ing; something to be V-ed		pb PE k9a3				+kaq	kaq	kaq	-\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1179 \
-kaq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(g)kaq													
\f0\b0 one that has V-ed; one that has been V-ed						~\'96(g)kaq	kaq	kaq	\
-kaqe-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\'96(g)kaqe-													
\f0\b0 to have V-ed (him/it)						@~\'96(g)kaqe-	kaqe	kaqe	\
-kaqsagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(g)kaqsagh-													
\f0\b0 to have V-ed fruitlessly; to have V-ed in vain; to have V-ed but. . . .						~\'96(g)kaqsagh-	kaqsagh	kaqsagh	\
-kaqu-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96qaqu-													
\f0\b0 to V intermittently						\'96qaqu-	kaqu	kaqu	\
~\'96kataghagh-	-rfnf4f4-	finally V despite a feeling that it wouldn't happen		atuqataghaghaa \'91he finally used it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to use\'92); aalkataghaghaa \'91he finally swept it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alleg- \'91to sweep\'92);  kakikataghaghtuq \'91she finally sewed\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaki- \'91to sew\'92)	at last (V ~)												to finally V despite a feeling that it wouldn't happen; to V at last		pb PE k(k)atta3- and q(q)atta3-				~\'96kataghagh-	kataghagh	kataghagh	-\uc0\u1082 \u1072 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
-kayugu-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(g)kayugu-													
\f0\b0 to be able to V; can V						~\'96(g)kayugu-	kayugu	kayugu	\
-kayugughte-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(g)kayugughte-													
\f0\b0 to become able to V						~\'96(g)kayugughte-	kayugughte-	kayugughte-	\
-kayuk				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(g)kayuk													
\f0\b0 one that V-s readily; one who is able to V						~\'96(g)kayuk	kayak	kayak	\

\f1\b ~\'96ke-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -rs-\'a1	have as one\'92s N		naakaat \'91she is their mother\'92 (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , \'91they have her as their mother\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naa \'91mother\'92); tuumkii \'91they are his prints\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuma\super e\nosupersub  \'91footprint\'92); angyaqaqa \'91it is my boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); kaamkagka \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  are my skin-boots\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kamek \'91skin-boot\'92); inglukaa \'91he is her partner or equal\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  inglu \'91partner; other of pair; spouse; complementery side\'92); Ungazim mekelngiiqiinkung \'91we\sub 2\nosupersub  are Chaplino(\'91s) boys\'92; 
\f2\i may be used with intransitive ending to mean
\f0\i0  \'91to have --(s)\'92: meghmeng imaquq \'91it contains water (has water as its contents)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  imaq \'91content\'92); Kiyaghsimaluku yuuk tagimalghii tagneqegtameng atku
\f1\b ke
\f0\b0 lghii. 'While she was living (thus), a man came 
\f1\b having
\f0\b0  a parka, a black one.' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92) (UNGIPAGHAGH. 24); Yuget ngelqaghmeng, alpameng kiyang atku
\f1\b k
\f0\b0 aqut. 'Men mostly 
\f1\b have
\f0\b0  parkas of cormorant and murre.' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:106); Qallukaat kaamget estullugmeng aat
\f1\b q
\f0\b0 ut. 'Reinder-leg boots 
\f1\b have
\f0\b0  the name \'93estulluk\'94.' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ateq \'91name\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:114); Iwerngaqun iquklighpigaat tazinga, umiilgem aallgha aghnaghaperewaaghmeng pani
\f1\b k
\f0\b0 elghii. 'Finally, he had only that very last (boat) to go with, the one which belonged to the poor chief; he 
\f1\b had
\f0\b0  daughters only.' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  panik \'91daughter\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:218); Taagken apallu
\f1\b q
\f0\b0 luteng allanguut iqallugneng. \'91
\f1\b Having
\f0\b0  that as a reason they are different from fish.\'92 (AANGHHAQ
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 64)	have N												have as one\'92s N; object is subject\'92s N; have N		pb PE k0(-)1		sentence example with Ungaziq\'92s boys is from Linda Badten		
\f1\b ~\'96ke-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ke1	ke1	-\uc0\u1082 \u1099 -1\

\f1\b ~\'96ke-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -rs-\'99	feel V toward		
\f2\i used with emotional roots and certain other bases generally dealing with emotions; 
\f0\i0 algumakaa \'91he is envious of of her\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alguma- \'91to be envious\'92); siknakaa \'91he is possessive of or stingy with it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  
\f2\i emotional root 
\f0\i0 sikna- \'91possessive\'92); kelengakaa \'91he is watching it warily\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kelnga- \'91to be wary\'92); yimikaa \'91he feels shy toward, inhibited or intimidated by him\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root
\f0\i0  yimi- \'91shy, inhibited, intimidated\'92)	toward (V toward)												to feel V toward; to V toward		pb PE k0(-)\super 1 \nosupersub (?)				
\f1\b ~\'96ke-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ke2	ke2	-\uc0\u1082 \u1099 -2\
?(ke)staaghhaa-	-\'f8rs\uc0\u960 cn656-	lack the quality of V		
\f2\i postbase
\f0\i0  ?(ke)staaghhaa-; 
\f2\i used mainly with dimensional roots; non-productive; many forms lexicalized; examples: 
\f0\i0 iqekestaaghhaaguq \'91it isn't wide, it is narrow\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  
\f2\i root
\f0\i0  iqe- \'91width\'92); amelkestaaghhaguq \'91it is narrow\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  amel- \'91breadth\'92); aghqestaaghhaaguq \'91it is shallow\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  aghqe- \'91shallowness\'92); mekestaaghhaaguq \'91it is small\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 meke- \'91smallness\'92); 
\f2\i underlyingly the final 
\f0\i0 aa- 
\f2\i is
\f0\i0  -au- 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  
\f2\i labializes the following consonant if possible:  
\f0\i0 takestaaghhaawa? \'91is it short?\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  take- \'91length\'92); Alla salngak uglaghllak aangaqluteng meke
\f1\b staaghhaa
\f0\b0 waqluteng tamaa. \'91Also they were many, large and 
\f1\b small
\f0\b0 .\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  meke- \'91smallness\'92) (SULUWET 1); Aas
\f1\b kestaaghhaa
\f0\b0 nghani kiyang malghugneghet piiqiit, \'85 \'91When it [the ice] did not extend out too far, they would open two boat paths, \'85\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  aas- \'91width\'92 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  aastu- \'91to be wider, extend out farther\'92 ) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:134)	have the quality of N	quality (lack, or have, the quality of N)											to lack the quality of V; to have the quality of N				< -(ke)staaghhaq-(ng)u-		?(ke)staaghhaa-	kestaghha	kestxghha	-(\uc0\u1082 \u1099 )\u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u257 -\
?(ke)staaghhaq*	-\'f8rs\uc0\u960 cn65f2	one that lacks the quality of N		
\f2\i used mainly with dimensional roots; non-productive; many forms lexicalized; 
\f0\i0 iqekestaaghhaq \'91narrow thing\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  iqe- \'91width\'92); mekestaaghhaq \'91small thing\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  meke- \'91smallness\'92); takestaaghhaq \'91short thing\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  take- \'91length\'92); aghqestaaghhaq \'91shallow thing\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  aghqe- \'91shallowness\'92); amelkestaaghaq,  (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 amel- \'91narrow\'92); qagughqestaaghhaq \'91one with a small forehead\'92 (
\f2\i from 
\f0\i0 qaguq \'91forehead\'92); = -(ke)staaq	one that has the quality of N	quality of N (the ~ of N)											one that lacks the quality of N; one that has the quality of N						?(ke)staaghhaq*	kestaghhaq	kestxghhaq	-(\uc0\u1082 \u1099 )\u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
?(ke)staaq	-\'f8rs\uc0\u960 cn62	one that lacks the quality of N		
\f2\i used mainly with dimensional roots; non-productive; many forms lexicalized; 
\f0\i0 iqekestaaq \'91narrow thing\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  iqe- \'91width\'92); mekestaaq \'91small thing\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  meke- \'91smallness\'92); takestaaq \'91short thing\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  take- \'91length\'92); aghqestaaq \'91shallow thing\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  aghqe- \'91shallowness\'92); amelkestaaq (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 amel- \'91narrow\'92); = -(ke)staaghhaq	one that has the quality of N	quality of N (the ~ of N)											one that lacks the quality of N; one that has the quality of N						?(ke)staaq	kestaq	kestxq	-(\uc0\u1082 \u1099 )\u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
+keghtaq	-rs5nf2	one from N		
\f2\i used with demonstrative adverb bases; 
\f0\i0 akmakeghtaq \'91one from way across there\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akma- \'91way across there\'92); =
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 +kaghtaq													one from N						+keghtaq	keghtaq	keghtaq	-\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
~\'96kegtaq	-rs[nf2	good (one with ~ N)		ugikegtaq \'91one with a good husband\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ugi \'91husband\'92); angyaqegtaq \'91one with a good boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq boat\'92); qikmiqegtaq \'91one with a good dog\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq dog\'92); kaamkegtaq \'91one with nice skin-boots\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kamek \'91skin-boot\'92)													one with good N		pb PY k0xtaq				~\'96kegtaq	kegtaq	kegtaq	-\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
~\'96kegte-	-rs[ns-	good (have ~ N)		cingikegtuq \'91it has a sharp point\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  cingik \'91point, tip\'92); iiskegtuq \'91he has good eyes, good eyesight\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iya\super e\nosupersub  \'91eye\'92); angyaqegtuq \'91he has a good boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); yuukegtuq \'91he is handsome\'92, yukegtuq \'91he is a good crewman\'92 (
\f2\i the last two both lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92)													to have good N		pb PE ki!-				~\'96kegte-	kegte	kegte	-\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
~\'96kenghhaq*	-rsy5f2	newly made or newly acquired N		ugikenghhaa \'91her new husband\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ugi \'91husband\'92); atkukenghhaq \'91newly made parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92); angyaqenghhaq \'91new boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92)													newly made or newly acquired N		< ?-nghhaq				~\'96kenghhaq*	kenghhaq	kenghhaq	-\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1085 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
~\'96ketagh-	-rsnf4-	tend to V by one\'92s disposition		
\f2\i used with emotional roots and certain other bases; 
\f0\i0 talluqetaghtuq \'91he is shy by nature, easily intimidated\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root
\f0\i0  tallugh- \'91shy, intimidated\'92); yimiketaghtuq \'91he is shy by nature, easily intimidated\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root 
\f0\i0 yimi- \'91shy, intimidated\'92); kaynguketaghtuq \'91he tends to be embarrassed\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root 
\f0\i0 kayngu- \'91embarrassed\'92); efleqetaghtuq \'91he tends to feel uncomfortable with stuff on skin or with other people too close, is inhospitable\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root
\f0\i0  eflegh- \'91to feel uncomfortable\'92); qaazuqetaghtuq \'91he tends to feel alienated, out of sorts\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root
\f0\i0  qaazugh- \'91alienated, depressed, out of sorts\'92); alingketaghtuq \'91he is easily scared\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alinge- \'91to be afraid\'92); kakafketaghtuq \'91he panics easily\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kakave- \'91to panic\'92)													to tend to V by one\'92s disposition		< ?-tagh-\super 3\nosupersub ; pb PE k(k)0ta3-				~\'96ketagh-	ketagh	ketagh	-\uc0\u1082 \u1099 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
-kiinagh-	-27yf4-			
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~\'96qiinagh-													
\f0\b0 to just V; to only V; to V just now						~\'96qiinagh-	kinagh	kxnagh	-\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
-kinghaq				
\f2\i see 
\f0\i0 \'96qinghaq													thing of N						\'96qinghaq	kinghaq	kinghaq	\
-kliq*				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b -qliq*													
\f0\b0 thing that is far to the N						\'96qliq*	kliq	kliq	\
-kragh-				
\f2\i see
\f1\i0\b  \'96qragh-													
\f0\b0 to do fancy V-ing; to V a new thing						\'96qragh-	kragh	kragh	\
\'96krak	-rhfr	small N		kemekrak \'91piece of meat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kemek \'91meat, flesh, skin on one\'92s body\'92); aghveqrak \'91small spring whale\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghveq \'91whale\'92); tagneqrak \'91mole, dot, freckle\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  tagneq \'91darkness\'92); neqekrak \'91bread, 
\f2\i especially
\f0\i0  pilot bread\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized from
\f0\i0  neqa\super e\nosupersub  \'91food\'92)	like (thing ~ N)												small N; thing like N		pb PY k5ak				\'96krak	krak	krak	-\uc0\u1082 \u1088 \u1072 \u1082 \
-kraq				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b \'96qraq													
\f0\b0 fancy piece of of N						\'96qraq	kraq	kraq	\
-krug-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96qrug-													
\f0\b0 for troublesome one to V						\'96qrug-	krug	krug	\
-kruk				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96qruk													
\f0\b0 good old N; bad old N (paradoxically); troublesome N						\'96qruk	kruk	kruk	\
\'96ksagute-	-rczuens-	acquire as one's N		piksagutaa \'91he acquired it as his, came to have it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pi \'91thing\'92); yuksagutaa \'91he took him as a crewman\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yuk \'91person, crewman\'92)													to acquire as one's N		pb PY kya!ut0-				\'96ksagute-	ksagute	ksagute	-\uc0\u1082 \u1089 \u1103 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
-kumtaaq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96qumtaaq													
\f0\b0 frequently V-ed thing; usually V-ed thing; commonly V-ed thing						~\'96qumtaaq	kumtaq	kumtxq	\
\'96kun	-rey	next (in the ~ N time)		
\f2\i used with time words; yields adverbial particles; 
\f0\i0 aghnequn \'91this afternoon, later today\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghneq \'91day\'92); ighivgaqun \'91this evening\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighivgaq \'91evening\'92); kiikun \'91this coming summer\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiik \'91summer\'92); uksuqun \'91this coming winter\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uksuq \'91winter\'92); uksaaqun \'91this coming fall\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uksaaq \'91fall\'92); upenghaqun \'91this coming spring\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  upenghaq \'91spring\'92); unukun \'91tonight\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  unuk \'91night\'92); whanikun \'91later on\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  whani \'91now\'92); qakun \'91when ? (in the future)\'92 (
\f2\i from interrogative root
\f0\i0  qa-); also aawhkaqun \'91in the springtime\'92 (
\f2\i from an unidentified base, perhaps as in 
\f0\i0 awa(ni) \'91over there\'92 (
\f2\i note
\f0\i0  aawhken \'91from over there\'92))	future (in the ~ N time)	coming (in the ~ N time)											in the next N time; in the future N time; in the coming N time		< vialis case				\'96kun	kun	kun	-\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1085 \
\'96kusiigh-	-rec74-	casually V		tagikusiightuq \'91he's coming, taking his time\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come\'92); agluqusiightuq \'91he is slowly returning home, slowly going home\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aglagh- \'91to go home\'92)	slowly V												to casually V; to slowly V						\'96kusiigh-	kusigh	kusxgh	-\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
-kutaq				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ?qutaq													
\f0\b0 device associated with N or with V-ing						?qutaq	kutaq	kutaq	\
\'96kuvinghaq	-redby4f2	remains of N		
\f2\i Chukotkan; 
\f0\i0 tunuquvinghaq \'91tallow\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tunuq \'91fat of caribou or reindeer\'92)									more examples needed, and is it only Siberian?				remains of N		pb PE vin03				\'96kuvinghaq	kuvinghaq	kuvinghaq	-\uc0\u1082 \u1091 \u1074 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
?kwaaq	-r162	leftover N		neqekwaaq \'91leftover food\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqa\super e\nosupersub  \'91food\'92); uquqwaaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uqughqwaaq \'91leftover oil\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uquq \'91oil\'92); kufilleghqwaaq \'91coffee dregs definitely of no use\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kufilleq \'91coffee dregs\'92); kemekragkwaaq \'91leftover meat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kemekrak \'91meat\'92)													leftover N		pb PE k(k)u3 and k(k)u(C)a3				?kwaaq	kwaq	kwxq	-\uc0\u1082 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
-kwaaqun				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b \'96qwaaqun													
\f0\b0 a little later in the N						\'96qwaaqun	kwaqun	kwxqun	\
@+laaghigate-	-k94bufns-	seldom V		Iteghyalghiimi apangita iiyngit qavagh
\f1\b laaghiga
\f0\b0 llghem iqaghtiighluteng. \'91When he came in their grandfather\'92s eyes were rubbed raw from 
\f1\b inadequate
\f0\b0  sleep.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92) (AKIINGQWAGH. 99); Ungaziq kaa
\f1\b llaaghigat
\f0\b0 aat angyaghpagkun piyaaghutemneng. \'91They 
\f1\b seldom
\f0\b0  came in to Chaplino by ship when I first started [going there].\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:128)	infrequently V	enough (not V ~)							examples needed	inadequately V			to seldom V; to infrequently V; to not V enough; inadequately V		< -?-(ng)igate-				@+laaghigate-	laghigate	lxghigate	-\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96laaq	-k92	insignificant N		
\f2\i non-productive (?); 
\f0\i0 yulaaq \'91person of low social status\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92)									need other examples				insignificant N		pb PE la(C)a3(-)				\'96laaq	laq	lxq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
+laataqu-	-k9nf2e-	luckily have V-ed well		qavaghlaataquuq \'91luckily he slept well\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); neghlaataquuq \'91luckily he ate well\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); kaallaataquuq \'91he arrived in time (to avoid danger or take advantage of an opportunity)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); pilaataquuq \'91he achieved success\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pi- \'91to do\'92)	well (luckily have V-ed ~)												to luckily have V-ed well						+laataqu-	lataqu	lxtaqu	-\uc0\u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
\'96lek	-ksr	with (one ~ N)		angyalek \'91boat owner or captain\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); qikmilek \'91one with dogs\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); umyugalek \'91sensible person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umyugaq \'91mind\'92); 
\f2\i the following are lexicalized: 
\f0\i0 yaqulek \'91angel\'92 (from yaquq \'91wing\'92); ilumilek \'91pregnant female\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ilumik \'91one \'93held\'94 inside\'92); imalek \'91filled thing, pregnant female\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  imaq \'91content\'92); aqsalek \'91pregnant female\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqsa \'91belly\'92); iyegaatelek \'91spectacled eider\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iyegaate(k) \'91eyeglass(es)\'92); kenulek \'91three-edged skin sewing needle\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kenuk \'91ridge, edge\'92); nasaperalek \'91bird type\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nasaperaq \'91cap\'92); elqiilek \'91bird type\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  elqiiq \'91visor\'92); qengalek \'91king eider\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qengaq \'91nose\'92); aghvinlek \'91six\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghvigh- \'91to cross over\'92 
\f2\i and intervening postbase
\f0\i0  -neq \'91act of V-ing\'92); ayaviilek \'91long-legged spider\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayaviiq \'91walking stick\'92); puugzaq tugutelek \'91narwhal\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  puugzaq \'91beluga\'92 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  tugun \'91tusk\'92); 
\f2\i often occurs as the \'93verb\'94 in a sentence without an actual verb: 
\f0\i0 Iimnanguq. Yugnguq nulii
\f1\b lek
\f0\b0 , ighne
\f1\b lek
\f0\b0  ama ighnegha nulii
\f1\b lek
\f0\b0 . \'91[It was] back then, it is said. [This certain] man, it is said, 
\f1\b had
\f0\b0  a wife, he 
\f1\b had
\f0\b0  a son, and his son 
\f1\b had
\f0\b0  a wife.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuliiq \'91wife\'92, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  ighneq \'91son\'92) (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 47)	having (one ~ N)	one having N											one having N; one with N		pb PE l0!				\'96lek	lek	lek	-\uc0\u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \
@lghaa-	-k46-	
\f2\i command former		forms commands, requests, etc. directed toward the future; takes intransitive participial endings and yields forms having a future optative meaning; this form is used with vowel-ending bases, changing
\f0\i0  tel 
\f2\i to
\f0\i0  ll 
\f2\i (inserting
\f0\i0  e 
\f2\i afterwords as necessary);
\f0\i0  tagilghaaten \'91(you) come here (in the future)\'92(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come here\'92); neghelghaakut \'91let's eat (future)\'92, neghelghaaq \'91he may eat (future)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); neghenghillghaakut \'91let's not eat (future)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghenghite- \'91to not eat\'92); laalighlleghaaten \'91(you) visit (future)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laalighte-); 
\f2\i with first person singular
\f0\i0  aa 
\f2\i becomes
\f0\i0  ii: aanelghiinga \'91I should go out (future)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92); 
\f2\i for consonant-ending bases the postbase 
\f0\i0  -ggaa-/-ghhaa- 
\f2\i (q.v.) is used instead; for transitives postbase
\f0\i0  -na-\super 1\nosupersub  
\f2\i (q.v.) is used instead	request former												command or request former						
\f0\i0 @lghaa-	lgha	lghx	-\uc0\u1083 \u1271 \u257 -\
\'96lghaq	-k4f2	holder for N		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 nanilghaq \'91lamp stand\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naniq \'91lamp\'92); angyalghat \'91boat rack\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); kuvesilghaq \'91dumping ground\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuve- 
\f2\i root for
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill, pour\'92, 
\f2\i and unidentified postbase
\f0\i0 ); llivelghaq \'91shelf\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  lliveq \'91grave\'92 (!?)); kaasilghaq \'91mortar\'92 (
\f2\i from a base or root
\f0\i0  kaasi- 
\f2\i also occuring in
\f0\i0  kaasitaq \'91pestle\'92)													holder for N						\'96lghaq	lghaq	lghaq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
@\'96lghii	-k47	one that V-ed		
\f2\i drops
\f0\i0  te 
\f2\i with
\f0\i0  lgh 
\f2\i then becoming voiceless and
\f0\i0  e 
\f2\i inserted as needed to break unpermitted clusters; rarely takes possessed ending; 
\f0\i0 qiyalghii \'91the one that cried\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); kaallghii \'91the one that arrived\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); laalighlleghhii \'91the one that visited\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laalighte- \'91to visit\'92); qavalghiit \'91the ones that slept\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); 
\f2\i also constitutes the marker of a certain (participial) verb mood taking only intransitive endings and having a past time implication; 
\f0\i0 neghelghii \'91he ate\'92 (
\f2\i as well as meaning \'91
\f0\i0 the one that ate\'92), neghelghiinga \'91I ate\'92 
\f2\i (from 
\f0\i0 negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92);
\f2\i  for bases ending in negative 
\f0\i0 te, @nguq 
\f2\i (q.v.) is used instead													
\f0\i0 the one that V-ed		pb PY-S l3i(C)a(q)				@\'96lghii	lghi	lghx	-\uc0\u1083 \u1271 \u1251 \
\'96lghun	-k4ey	lots of N		
\f2\i takes singular endings even for a plurality of things; 
\f0\i0 ukazilghun \'91lots of hares\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ukaziq \'91hare\'92); manilghun \'91a group of eggs as in a nest\'92; Ayumighnguq taghnughha
\f1\b lghun
\f0\b0  tuqulaghaatkaaftuq iiwhlagmi ulefqaghulluki. \'91Long ago, they say, 
\f1\b a number of 
\f0\b0 children all died when during a very low tide [which allowed, or lured, them to go to far out in the sea] it [the water] then flooded over them.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taghnughhaq \'91child\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:236)	number (a ~ of N)	several N								group (a ~ of N)			lots of N; a number of N; several N; a group of N		pb PY-S l3utaq				\'96lghun	lghun	lghun	-\uc0\u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1085 \
\'96lghutaq	-k4enf2	place for N		manilghutaq \'91wallet; bank\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mani \'91money\'92); mangtalghutaq \'91place to store whale skin\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangtak \'91whale skin\'92); igaasilghutaq \'91pencil box\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igaasiq \'91pencil\'92; aghalghutaq \'91medicine bottle\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  agha \'91medicine\'92); neqelghutaq \'91cache\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqa\super e\nosupersub  \'91food\'92); uqulghutaq \'91oil or gas tank\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uquq \'91oil\'92); salghutaq \'91pantry, storage area\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sa \'91thing\'92); sakwaalghutaq \'91trash container\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sakwaaq \'91trash\'92); melghutaq \'91water container\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92); igalghutaq \'91briefcase, filing cabinet\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igaq \'91paper for or with writing\'92); mangtalghutaq \'91vessel for storing edible whale skin\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangtak \'91edible whale skin\'92); mesiilghutaq \'91vessel for melted fat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mesiiq \'91melted fat\'92); mallalghutaq \'91dustbin\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mallaq \'91dust\'92); manilghutaq \'91coin purse, bank\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mani \'91money\'92); sikulghutaq \'91needle case\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sikuq \'91needle\'92); kaalghutaq \'91cow-shed, barn\'92 
\f2\i (Chukotkan) 
\f0\i0 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaakw \'91cow\'92); taghnughhalghutaq \'91womb\'92 
\f2\i (Chukotkan) 
\f0\i0 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taghnughhaq \'91child\'92)	container for N												place for N; container for N		pb PY-S l3utaq				\'96lghutaq	lghutaq	lghutaq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96lgigh-	-kub4-	travel using N		qikmilgightuq \'91he went with dogs\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); angyalgightuq \'91he went by boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92)													to travel using N		pb PE l!i3				\'96lgigh-	lgigh	lgigh	-\uc0\u1083 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
\'96lgu-	-kue-	have N		mangteghaghrugllalguuq \'91he has a big house\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangteghaghrugllak \'91big house\'92); avaqutalguunga \'91I have a son, or sons\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  avaqutaq \'91son\'92); qafsinaneng panilguzin? \'91how many daughters do you have?\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  panik \'91daughter\'92)	possess N												to have an N or have N-s; to possess N		< -lek-(ng)u-; pb PY l!u-				\'96lgu-	lgu	lgu	-\uc0\u1083 \u1075 \u1091 -\
\'96lgun	-kuey	one with the same N		
\f2\i takes possessed or non-singular unpossessed endings; 
\f0\i0 nunalgutnga \'91his fellow villager\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuna \'91village\'92); nelgutek \'91roommates\sub 2\nosupersub \'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  na\super e\nosupersub  \'91home\'92)	same (one with the ~ N)												one with the same N		pb PY-S l!un				\'96lgun	lgun	lgun	-\uc0\u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \
\'96lgusigh-	-kuecb4-	with (V together ~)		qiyalgusighaa \'91he shared her grief\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92)	help (object) V												to V together with; to help (object) V		< -lgun-ligh-				\'96lgusigh-	lgusigh	lgusigh	-\uc0\u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
\'96lgute-	-kuens-	with (V together ~)		Taagken kenlanga qatelghiim unisimakanga meteghlluk alla kiyaghte
\f1\b lgutes
\f0\b0 aghqaagpenaan. \'91Thereupon the fox left the raven, never to live 
\f1\b with
\f0\b0  it again.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiyaghte- \'91to live\'92) (UNGIPAGHAGH. 130)	help (object) V												to V together with; to help (object) V		< -lgun				\'96lgute-	lgute	lgute	-\uc0\u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96lgutke-	-kuenrs-	with (V together ~)		epghalgutkaa \'91he worked with her\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92)	help (object) V												to V together with; to help (object) V		< -lgun-ke-\super 1				\nosupersub \'96lgutke-	lgutke	lgutke	-\uc0\u1083 \u1075 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
\'96li-	-kb-	make N		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 neliiq \'91he made a home\'92, nelii \'91he made a home for her, or from it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  na\super e\nosupersub  \'91home\'92); 
\f2\i often shortened to
\f0\i0  \'96\'96i-\super 2 
\f2\i \nosupersub (q.v.)													
\f0\i0 to make N		pb PE li-1				\'96li-	li	li	-\uc0\u1083 \u1080 -\
-li-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ?(gh/l)i-													
\f0\b0 become V						?(gh/l)i-	li	li	\
\'96ligh-	-kb4-	provide with N		pagunghalighaa \'91he put berries in it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pagunghaq \'91berry\'92); sikulighaa \'91he installed a needle in it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sikuq \'91needle\'92); aghalighaa \'91he gave her medicine\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  agha \'91medicine\'92); ghhuulighaa \'91he loaded it (a gun)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ghhuuq \'91bullet\'92); ilalighaa \'91he added something to it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ila \'91part\'92); neqlighaa \'91he poisoned it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqa\super e\nosupersub  \'91food\'92); qayelighaa \'91he covered it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaya\super e\nosupersub  \'91surface\'92); usilighaa \'91he loaded it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  usi \'91load\'92);
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 atelighaa \'91he named him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ateq \'91name\'92); kenelighaa \'91he shined a light on it, put a light in it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  keneq \'91fire, light\'92); 
\f2\i may be shortened to 
\f0\i0 \'96\'96igh- 
\f2\i (q.v.) 	
\f0\i0 put N in												to provide with N; to put N in						\'96ligh-	ligh	ligh	-\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
?lighneq	-kb4ys2	part (N ~ (of possessor))		ilulighneghani \'91in the inside part of it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ilu \'91inside\'92); qulighneq \'91upper part\'92; awalighneq \'91other side\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  awa(ni) \'91over there\'92); uvilighneq \'91neighbor, relative\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from root 
\f0\i0 uvi-, 
\f2\i as in 
\f0\i0 uvin \'91yard around house, kinfolk, area, surface\'92, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  uvinek \'91human skin, close relative\'92); kelulighneq \'91area seen from the sea\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kelu \'91area back from shore\'92)													N part (of possessor)		< -ligh-neq\super 2\nosupersub ; PY-S li3neq				?lighneq	lighneq	lighneq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1271 \u1085 \u1099 \u1179 \
?lighpigaq	-kb5gbuf2	very N-most one		
\f2\i used with positionals, some demonstrative adverb bases, and the like; 
\f0\i0 kingulighpigaq \'91the very last one\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kingu \'91behind, back\'92); kiwalighpigaq \'91the very southernmost area\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiwa(ni) \'91in the south\'92)													very N-most one		< -liq-pigaq				?lighpigaq	lighpigaq	lighpigaq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1203 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96liigh-	-k74-	fix N		aghveliightuq \'91he was cooking whale\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghveq \'91whale\'92); angyaliightuq \'91he was making a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); 1914-mi mangtegh
\f1\b iigh
\f0\b0 yuwhaallghitni legan kiigani. \'91In 1914 the first houses were 
\f1\b built
\f0\b0  there.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangteghaq \'91house\'92, 
\f2\i shortened from
\f0\i0  mangtegha
\f1\b liigh
\f0\b0 \'85) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:56); 
\f2\i may be shortened to \'96\'96
\f0\i0 iigh- 
\f2\i (q.v.)	
\f0\i0 make N	prepare N								cook N			to fix N; to make N; to prepare N; to cook N				
\f3 PE 
\f0 -li(C)u3-		\'96liigh-	ligh	lxgh	-\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1271 -\
\'96liite-	-k7ns-	obtain (have ~ed (object) as one\'92s N)		piliitaqa \'91it's mine now\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pi \'91thing\'92); angyaliitaa \'91it\'92s his boat now\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); neliitiit \'91they have made it their home\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  na\super e\nosupersub  \'91place, home\'92)													to have obtained (object) as one\'92s N		< -ligh-(u)te-				\'96liite-	lite	lxte	-\uc0\u1083 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96linghaq*	-kby4f2	thing of N		yulinghaq \'91foreign-made thing; 
\f2\i now
\f0\i0 , factory-made thing, 
\f2\i formerly
\f0\i0 , Chukotkan thing\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92); tungtulinghaq \'91piece of caribou fur\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tungtu \'91caribou\'92)													thing of N		pb PY lin3aq				\'96linghaq*	linghaq	linghaq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96lipag-	-kbgfu-	put in too much N		taghyulipagaa \'91he put too much salt in it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taghyuq \'91salt\'92)	too much N (put in ~ N)								more examples needed				to put in too much N		< -ligh-pag-				\'96lipag-	lipag	lipag	-\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
?liq	-kb2	one that is N		
\f2\i used with positionals, some demonstrative adverb bases, and the like; 
\f0\i0 sivuliq \'91first one\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sivu \'91area in front\'92); iluliq \'91inner one\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ilu \'91area inside\'92); tuungliq \'91next one\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tunga\super e\nosupersub  \'91area toward\'92); kinguliq \'91descendent\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  kingu \'91time or place after\'92); paasliq \'91cuff of sleeve\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  paya\super e\nosupersub  \'91opening\'92); 
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  Ayuqliq \'91mainland Alaskan Eskimo\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  ayuqe- \'91to be similar\'92); ketliq \'91one near exit or toward the south\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  keta\super e\nosupersub  \'91area in front, toward water\'92)													one that is N		pb PE l(l)i3				?liq	liq	liq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \
\'96liqe-	-kb2s-	deal with N		kaviiliquq \'91he's dealing with foxes\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaviiq \'91fox\'92); pagunghaliquq \'91he's working with berries\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pagunghaq \'91berry\'92); uuknaliquq \'91he is making prophecies\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uukna \'91that which is to come\'92);  iluliquq \'91he has heart trouble\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  ilu \'91interior\'92); ululiquq \'91he is being sarcastic, speaking inappropriately\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  ulu \'91tongue\'92); 
\f2\i may be shortened to 
\f0\i0 \'96\'96iqe- 
\f2\i (q.v.)	
\f0\i0 work with N	pain in one's N								trouble (have ~ with one's N)			to deal with N; to work with N; to have pain in one's N; to have trouble with one's N		pb PE liq0-				\'96liqe-	liqe	liqe	-\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
\'96llaag-	-k]9u-	crudely V		neghellaagtuq \'91he ate in a crude way; he (a crude one) ate\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92)	crude one V-s	clumsy (V in a ~ way)							needs more examples				to V in a crude or clumsy way; crude one V-s						\'96llaag-	llag	llxg	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 -\
\'96llaak	-k]9r	crude N		angyallaak \'91bad boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq);  atkullaak \'91bad parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92); kamellaagek \'91bad pair of boots\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kamek \'91boot\'92); = -rraak	clumsy N	bad N											crude N; clumsy N; bad N						\'96llaak	llak	llxk	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1103 \u772 \u1082 \
\'96llegagh-	-k]suf4-	crudely V											need examples				to V crudely						\'96llegagh-	llegagh-	llegagh-	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96llegaq*	-k]suf2	crudely made N		angyallegaq \'91crudely made boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); kamellegaak \'91pair of crudely made boots\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kamek \'91boot\'92)													crudely made N						\'96llegaq*	llegaq	llegaq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96lleghpigaq	-l]s5gbuf2	most V one		aangelleghpigaq \'91biggest one\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aange- \'91to be big\'92); taakelleghpigaq \'91longest one\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taake- \'91to be long\'92)													most V one		< -lleq-pigaq				\'96lleghpigaq	lleghpigaq	lleghpigaq	-\uc0\u1076 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96lleghqaq	-k]s52f2	future act of V-ing		aghneghsaghtulleghqaa \'91her future act, her intention, of going to spend the day (at a certain place)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghneghsaghtugh- \'91to go to spend the day\'92); Aghhutanga tamaghhaan takwaaqiit mangtaaghhaat.  Iiskughtaqiit maniggaat tuke
\f1\b lleghq
\f0\b0 iit. \'91Every day they would check the eggs in the nest. \'91They would watch for 
\f1\b when
\f0\b0  those the little eggs 
\f1\b would
\f0\b0  hatch.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tukegh- \'91to hatch\'92) (PIYAA. 8)	act (future ~ of V-ing)												future act of V-ing		-lleq\super 1\nosupersub -kaq				\'96lleghqaq	lleghqaq	lleghqaq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
?lleghqiite-	-k]s527ns-	never V in the future											needs examples				to never V in the future		< -lleghqaq-(ng)ite-				?lleghqiite-	lleghqite	lleghqxte	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1203 \u1179 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96llek	-k]sr	well (one who V-s ~)		pillek \'91capable person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pi- \'91to do\'92); atullget \'91good singers\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to sing\'92); angyallek \'91good boatman\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyagh- \'91to use a boat\'92); 
\f2\i also possibly, 
\f0\i0 Quyillek \'91Chukchi\'92 (
\f2\i from an unidentified base)	
\f0\i0 proficient V-er	good V-er											one who V-s well; proficient V-er; good V-er		pb PE @(0)!u-				\'96llek	llek	llek	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1082 \

\f1\b \'96lleq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -k]s2\super \'a1	\nosupersub one that has V-ed or been V-ed		tugullgha \'91the thing he took\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tugu- \'91to take\'92); igalleq \'91the one who wrote; the act of writing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igagh- \'91to write\'92); 
\f2\i the following are book titles:
\f0\i0  Sikumengllu Eslamengllu 
\f2\i Esghapalleghput 
\f0\i0  (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  esghapag- \'91to watch\'92) \'91Watching Ice and Weather Our Way\'92 (
\f2\i literally,
\f0\i0  \'91our act of watching ice and weather\'92); Akuzilleput Igaqullghet (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akuzi- \'91to speak\'92, and igaqu- \'91to write down\'92) \'91Our Words Put to Paper\'92 (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , \'91the ones we spoke -- the ones that were written down\'92)	act of V-ing; activity of V-ing	one the possessor V-ed											one that has V-ed or been V-ed; act of V-ing; activity of V-ing; the one the possessor V-ed		pb PE -@0q				\'96lleq\super 1	\nosupersub lleq1	lleq1	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 1\

\f1\b \'96lleq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -k]s2\super \'99	\nosupersub one or ones which are V to the greatest extent		iknaqe
\f1\b llgh
\f0\b0 uftunga pinighqaa
\f1\b llgh
\f0\b0 uftunga, nangniite
\f1\b llgh
\f0\b0 uftunga \'91it turns out that I am the strong
\f1\b er
\f0\b0  one, the 
\f1\b more
\f0\b0  capable one, the 
\f1\b more
\f0\b0  fearless one.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iknaqe- \'91to be strong\'92, pinighqaa- \'91to be capable\'92, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  nangniite- \'91to be fearless\'92) (AANGHHAQ  38); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  -neq\super 3	\nosupersub most (the one or ones which are ~ V)	more (the one or ones which are ~ V)											one or ones which are V to the greatest extent; most V one(s); more V one(s)						\'96lleq\super 2	\nosupersub lleq2	lleq2	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 2\
@+lleqe-	-k]s2s-	future (V in the ~)		qiyallequq \'91he will cry\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); kuuvelleqaa \'91he will spill it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill\'92); qavaghllequq \'91he will sleep\'92 (from qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); esghaghlleqamken \'91I'll see you\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  esghagh- \'91to see\'92); 
\f2\i drops
\f0\i0  te: kaallequq \'91he will arrive\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); ingaghllequq \'91he will lie down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92)	will V												to V in the future; will V		pb PE ciq0-				@+lleqe-	lleqe	lleqe	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1099 \u1179 \u1099 -\
\'96llgaq	-k][f2	one with small N		savillgaq \'91one with a little knife; little one with a knife\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  savik \'91knife\'92)	little one with N								needs more examples				one with small N; little one with N						\'96llgaq	llgaq	llgaq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96llghite-	-k]5bns-	not V		neghellghitaa \'91he didn't eat it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); laalightellghitaa \'91he didn't visit him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laalighte- to visit\'92); qavallghituq \'91he didn't sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); itellghituq \'91he didn't enter\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to enter\'92); 
\f2\i apparently interchangeable with 
\f0\i0 \'96nghite- 
\f2\i (q.v.)									
\f0\i0 see if this really is interchangeable with -nghite- ???				to not V		< -lleq-(ng)ite-				\'96llghite-	llghite	llghite	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1203 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96llgiite-	-k][7ns-	poor (become a ~ V-er)		atullgiituq \'91he lost his ability to sing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to sing\'92)									needs more examples				to become a poor V-er		< -llek-(ng)i(gh)ute-				\'96llgiite-	llgite	llgxte	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96llgilliqe-	-k]bk]b2s-	experience trouble in V-ing		qavallgilliqunga \'91I had trouble sleeping\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92)     									needs further examples				to experience trouble in V-ing						\'96llgilliqe-	llgilliqe	llgilliqe	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
\'96llgite-	-k]bns-	poorly (V ~)		akuzillgituq \'91he speaks poorly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akuzi- \'91to speak\'92); pillgituq \'91he is inept\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pi- \'91to do\'92)									needs further examples				to V poorly		< -llek-(ng)ite-				\'96llgite-	llgite	llgite	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96llgu-	-k][e-	well (to V ~)		akuzillguuq \'91he speaks well\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akuzi- \'91to speak\'92); Aywaaneng anuqa ugavaneng ayuqenghani qawaagnii
\f1\b llgu
\f0\b0 naghaquq. \'91Whenever it was the case that the wind was from the north or northwest it (the conditions) would be conducive to hunting birds 
\f1\b successfully
\f0\b0 .\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qawaagniigh- \'91to hunt birds\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:134)									needs further examples				to V well		< -llek-(ng)u-; pb PE @(0)!u-				\'96llgu-	llgu	llgu	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1091 -\
?lliighagh-	-k]74f4-	get V-er		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 takelliighaghtuq \'91it got shorter\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  take- 
\f2\i as in 
\f0\i0 takelli- \'91to shorten\'92 
\f2\i and 
\f0\i0 taake- \'91to be long\'92); mekelliighaghaa \'91he made it smaller\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 meke- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  mekelli- \'91to get smaller\'92 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  mekestaaghhaq \'91small thing\'92); uniighlliighaghtuq \'91it became pliable\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uniigh- \'91to become limp\'92); qetulliighaghtuq \'91it softened\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  qetu- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  qetusqaaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qetusqwaaq \'91soft thing\'92); aghqelliighaghaa \'91he made it low\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 aghqe- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  aghqestaaghhaq \'91low thing\'92)	make (it) more V												to get V-er; to make (it) more V						?lliighagh-	llighagh	llxghagh	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1251 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'b1lliqe-	-kb2s-	trouble (have ~ V-ing or with one\'92s N)		qavaghlliquq \'91he has insomnia\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); ilulliquq \'91he\'92s in a bad mood\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ilu \'91inside\'92); nelliquq \'91he\'92s behaving badly\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  na\super e\nosupersub  \'91place, home\'92); paarghulliquq \'91he has appendicitis\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  paarghuk \'91appendix\'92); pineghlliquq \'91he\'92s being obstinate, stubborn\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pineq \'91the activity of doing things\'92); qaneghlliquq \'91he\'92s gossiping\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized,
\f0\i0  
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qanegh- \'91to speak idly\'92); qenngulliquq \'91he\'92s frowing or squinting\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qenngu \'91brow area\'92); tuyelliquq \'91he has aching shoulders\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuya\super e\nosupersub  \'91shoulder\'92); ululliquq \'91he\'92s being sarcastic, speaking inappropriately\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  ulu \'91tongue\'92); umyugaghlliquq \'91he has a difficult disposition\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umyugaq \'91mind\'92); uyaqulliquq \'91he has neck pains\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uyaquq \'91neck\'92); aqsalliquq \'91he has a stomachache\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqsa \'91stomach\'92)													to have trouble V-ing or with one\'92s N		< -lluk-iqe-				\'b1lliqe-	lliqe	lliqe	-\uc0\u1083 \u1080 \u1179 \u1099 -\
\'b1llug-	-k]/u-	undesirable (V in a ~ way; ~ one V-s)			bad (V in a ~ way; ~ one V-s)								need examples				to V in an undesirable or bad way; for undesirable or bad one to V		pb PE @(0)!u-				\'b1llug-	llug	llug	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1075 -\
\'b1lluggaq	-k]/[f2	dear little meek N		yulluggaq \'91dear little meek man\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92); Legan savigpani amuluku nanevga
\f1\b lluggaq
\f0\b0  tawavek piighaghlluku tuqutaa. \'91And so pulling out his great big knife he killed the 
\f1\b little ol\'92
\f0\b0  man, cutting him up.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nanevgaq \'91old man\'92) (QATEP. 26)	little (dear ~ meek N)	meek (dear little ~ N)							need more examples				dear little meek N		< -lluk-ghhaq				\'b1lluggaq	lluggaq	lluggaq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'b1lluk	-k]/r	poor quality N		yulluk \'91bad man\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91man\'92); iyelluk \'91eye trouble\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iya\super e\nosupersub  \'91eye\'92); ilulluk \'91bad-tempered person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ilu \'91insides\'92); neqelluk \'91old food\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqa\super e\nosupersub  \'91food\'92); tepelluk \'91bad odor\'92 (from tepa\super e\nosupersub  \'91odor\'92); eslalluk \'91rain\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  esla \'91weather\'92); itegalluk 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  itegaghlluk \'91sore or infected foot\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegaq \'91foot\'92); naasqughlluk \'91aged fish head\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naasquq \'91head\'92); qaneghlluk \'91gossip\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized,
\f0\i0  
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaneq \'91mouth\'92 (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qanegh- \'91to speak idly\'92)); tanqighlluk \'91bright moonlight\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized
\f0\i0 , 
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tanqiq \'91moon\'92); angyaghlluk \'91small ice floe used as a makeshift boat or raft to cross open water\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized
\f0\i0 , 
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); tugutluk \'91fossilized tusk\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  tugun \'91tusk\'92)	undesirable N	ideal (N not in its ~ state)								bad N			poor quality N; bad N; undesirable N; N not in its ideal state		pb PE @(0)!u-				\'b1lluk	lluk	lluk	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1082 \
\'96lqiinagh-	-k]27yf4-	long time (V for a ~)		= -lqinagh-									need examples				to V for a long time		< -?-(ng)inagh-				\'96lqiinagh-	lqinagh	lqxnagh	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96lqinagh-	-k]2byf4-	long time (V for a ~)		\'85 igleghtuq, igleghtuq, igleghte
\f1\b lqinagh
\f0\b0 luni, kii, nenglughrukutaaghllak esghaghaa. \'91\'85 he traveled, and traveled and after traveling 
\f1\b for a long time,
\f0\b0  lo and behold he saw a great big house.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igleghte- \'91to travel\'92) (AYUM. UNGIP. II:26); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 -lqiinagh-									need more examples				to V for a long time		< ?-(ng)inagh-				\'96lqinagh-	lqinagh	lqinagh	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96lqusiigh-	-k]2ec74-	angrily V		akuzilqusiightuq \'91he\'92s making sharp, caustic remarks\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akuzi- \'91to speak\'92)													to V angrily		< -lqusiq-(ng)igh- (?)				\'96lqusiigh-	lqusigh	lqusxgh	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
\'96lqusiq	-k]2ecb2	all N		
\f2\i used with time words; yields forms which may function as nouns or adverbial particles; 
\f0\i0 aghnelqusiq \'91all day\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghneq \'91day\'92); unulqusiq \'91all night\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  unuk \'91night\'92); unaalqusiq \'91all morning\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  unaaq \'91morning\'92); kiilqusiq \'91all summer\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiik \'91summer\'92); uksulqusiq \'91all winter\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uksuq \'91winter\'92); upenghalqusiq \'91all spring\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  upenghaq \'91spring\'92); ayumilqusiq \'91all year\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayumiq \'91year\'92); ighivgalqusiq \'91since last year\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighivgaq \'91last year\'92); aawhkalqusiq \'91since some time ago\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aawhkan \'91a while ago\'92); Maani quyngighniighuluta quunpeng kii
\f1\b lqusiq
\f0\b0  uksu
\f1\b lqusiq
\f0\b0  quyngiq nayuqluku ayuqegkefut, quyngighniighllagulghiikut. \'91After we started herding reindeer here always, it seems, we\'92d watch the reindeer, 
\f1\b all
\f0\b0  summer and 
\f1\b all
\f0\b0  winter.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiik \'91summer\'92, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  uksuq \'91winter\'92) (SIVUQ. UNGIP. 21); Nome-elluteng tagiyalghiimeng, sloop-engumalghiit Cheechako-nguftuq aatgha angyaghpa
\f1\b lqusigh
\f0\b0 raagpak ataasimeng napaghyaqelghii. \'91Having gone to Nome when the one that was a sloop came its name was Cheechako, a fairly 
\f1\b big
\f0\b0  ship having a single mast.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaghpak \'91ship\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:112)	throughout the N	since last N								big N			all N; throughout the N; since last N; big N		< -?-(u)siq			> -naqelqusiigh-	\'96lqusiq	lqusiq	lqusiq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1091 \u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
\'96lqwaaq	-k]2162	old N		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 aghnalqwaaq \'91old woman\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghnaq \'91woman\'92); = -rqwaaq, -sqwaaq									cf. CAY -lquar(aq) -- a new CED set!				old N		+pb PY -@quaq \'91old\'92				\'96lqwaaq	lqwaq	lqwxq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1100 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
@+lugh-	-k/4-	little (V a ~)		piyuglughtuq \'91he walked a little; the little one walked\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  piyug- \'91to walk\'92); kaallughtuq \'91the little one arrived\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92)	little one V-s												to V a little; little one V-s 						@+lugh-	lugh	lugh	-\uc0\u1083 \u1102 \u1271 -\
\'96lugpigaq	-k/[gbuf2	fine old N		angyalugpigaq \'91fine old boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92)	old (fine ~ N)								need more examples				fine old N		< luk-pigaq; pb PY lu!pi!aq				\'96lugpigaq	lugpigaq	lugpigaq	-\uc0\u1083 \u1102 \u1093 \u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96luk	-k/r	old (in age) N		angyaluk \'91old boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); qikmiluk \'91old dog\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); Kiigmi enraq temka
\f1\b luget 
\f0\b0 aghvigluku, satangi kavighlluki piiqiit kamengllaghaqiit. \'91In the summer they would wash the 
\f1\b old
\f0\b0  sealskin pants, color their skin side re, and make them into boots.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  temka(k) \'91sealskin pant(s), trouser(s)\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:114)													old (in age) N						\'96luk	luk	luk	-\uc0\u1083 \u1102 \u1082 \
-ma-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~:(i/u)ma-													
\f0\b0 to have V-ed or been V-ed; to be in a state of having V-ed or been V-ed; with participial mood: to evidently have V-ed or been V-ed						@~:(i/u)ma-	ma	ma	\
-mafte-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(i/u)mafte-													
\f0\b0 how much subject evidently has V-ed!						@~:(i/u)mafte-	mafte-	mafte-	\
-magh-				
\f2\i see at 
\f1\i0\b @~:(i/u)magh-													
\f0\b0 while V-ing						@~:(i/u)magh-	magh	magh	\
-man				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~:(i/u)man													
\f0\b0 the time while V-ing; the course of V-ing						@~:(i/u)man	man	man	\
-manginagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(i/u)manginagh-													
\f0\b0 V-ing every time; V-ing the whole time						@~:(i/u)manginagh-	manginagh	manginagh	\
-mangite-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(i/u)mangite-													
\f0\b0 to not have V-ed						@~:(i/u)mangite-	mangite	mangite	\

\f1\b +mete-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -vsns-\'a1	be V		
\f2\i a contraction of the 4th person singular quantifier/qualifier ending
\f0\i0  +mi 
\f2\i and the archaic verb base 
\f0\i0 ete- \'91to be\'92; 
\f2\i now a postbase in its own right as can be seen by the fact that it can take endings other than 3rd person singular; 
\f0\i0 iqragmetuq \'91it is uneven\'92, iqragmetut \'91they are uneven\'92, iqragmelnguq \'91an uneven thing\'92 (
\f2\i from postural root 
\f0\i0 iqrag- \'91uneven\'92)									need more examples				to be V						
\f1\b +mete-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub mete1	mete1	-\uc0\u1084 \u1099 \u1090 \u1099 -1\
\'96mlaagh-	-vk94-	little (V a ~)		= -mraagh-, -mzaagh-, -mleghagh-, -mreghagh-, -mzeghagh-, -vlaagh-, -vleghagh-									need examples				V a little						\'96mlaagh-	mlagh	mlxgh	-\uc0\u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
\'96mlaaq	-vk92	little bit of N or little thing like N		= -mraaq, -mzaaq, -mleghaq, -mreghaq, -mzeghaq, -vlaaq, -vlegaq									need examples				little bit of N or little thing like N						\'96mlaaq	mlaq	mlxq	-\uc0\u1084 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
\'96mlegagh-	-vks4f4-	little (V a ~)		akuzimleghaghtuq \'91he\'92s whispering\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akuzi- \'91to speak\'92); = -mlaagh-, -mraagh-, -mzaagh-, -mreghagh, -mzeghagh-, -vlaagh-, -vleghagh-									need examples				V a little						\'96mlegagh-	mlegagh	mlegagh	-\uc0\u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96mleghaq	-vks4f2	little bit of N or little thing like N		= -mlaaq, -mraaq, -mzaaq, -mreghagh, -mzeghaq, -vlaaq, -vleghaq									need examples				little bit of N or little thing like N						\'96mleghaq	mleghaq	mleghaq	-\uc0\u1084 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96mraagh-	-vh64-	little (V a ~)		= -mlaagh-, -mzaagh-, -mleghagh-, -mreghagh-, -mzeghagh-, -vlaagh-, -vleghagh-									need examples				V a little						\'96mraagh-	mragh	mrxgh	-\uc0\u1084 \u1088 \u257 \u1271 -\
\'96mraaq	-vh62	little bit of N or little thing like N		= -mlaaq, -mzaaq, -mleghaq, -mreghaq, -mzeghaq, -vlaaq, -vleghaq									need examples				little bit of N or little thing like N						\'96mraaq	mraq	mrxq	-\uc0\u1084 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
\'96mreghagh-	-vhs4f4-	little (V a ~)		= -mlaagh-, -mraagh-, -mzaagh-, -mleghagh-, -mzeghagh-, -vlaagh-, -vleghagh-									need examples				V a little						\'96mreghagh-	mreghagh	mreghagh	-\uc0\u1084 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96mreghaq	-vhs4f2	little bit of N or little thing like N		= -mlaaq, -mraaq, -mzaaq, -mleghaq, -mzeghaq, -vlaaq, -vlegaq									need examples				little bit of N or little thing like N						\'96mreghaq	mreghaq	mreghaq	-\uc0\u1084 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96mrugnite-	-vheuybns-	seem to be somewhat V		
\f2\i used with descriptive verb bases; 
\f0\i0 aangemrugnituq \'91it seems to be somewhat big\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aange- \'91to be big\'92)									need more examples				to seem to be somewhat V						\'96mrugnite-	mrugnite	mrugnite	-\uc0\u1084 \u1088 \u1091 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96msiigh-	-vc74-	ineffectively V or V without putting effort into it		qepghamsiightuq \'91he's working but ineffectively or not very hard\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92); qavamsiightuq \'91he's sleeping lightly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92)	hardship (V under conditions of ~)												to V ineffectively or without putting effort into it; to V under conditions of hardship						\'96msiigh-	msigh	msxgh	-\uc0\u1084 \u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
\'96msiiq	-vc72	something like N		qikmimsiiq \'91something like a dog\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); =
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 -siiq													something like N						\'96msiiq	msiq	msxq	-\uc0\u1084 \u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
\'96msug-	-vc/u-	casually V		qepghamsugtuq \'91he's working casually\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92); neghemsugtuq \'91he snacked\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); ungipamsugtuq \'91he told about some not too major event that happened\'92, ungipamsugutaa \'91he told him about a not major event\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ungipagh- \'91to tell\'92)	nonchalantly V												to casually V; to nonchalantly V						\'96msug-	msug	msug	-\uc0\u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
\'96msuggaq*	-vc/[f2	no N		avamsuggaq \'91virtually nothing\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0  ava- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  avangituq \'91it is lacking\'92); qallemsuggaq \'91quietly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qalleg- \'91to speak\'92); Aki
\f1\b msugga
\f0\b0 ngunaan urang, qamagtengngwaaghwaaghluku qepghalghii, enkaangam quynginguutkayuguyalghii, tuqutanguutaqelghii. \'91Since the price was 
\f1\b low
\f0\b0  every one of the workers had a chance to buy reindeer meat or carcasses.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aki \'91price, value\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:84)									need more examples				no N; virtually no N						\'96msuggaq*	msuggaq	msuggaq	-\uc0\u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96msuggiite-	-vc/[7ns-	completely lack N		yumsuggiituq \'91there\'92s no one around\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92); akimsuggiituq \'91it is very cheap, is worth very little\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aki \'91value, price\'92)	lack N completely								needs more examples				to completely lack N		< -msuggaq-(ng)ite-				\'96msuggiite-	msuggite	msuggxte	-\uc0\u1084 \u1089 \u1102 \u1093 \u1251 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96mzaagh-	-vp94-	little (V a ~)		= -mlaagh-, -mraagh-, -mleghagh-, -mreghagh-, -mzeghagh-, -vlaagh-, -vlegagh-									need examples				V a little						\'96mzaagh-	mzagh	mzxgh	-\uc0\u1084 \u1079 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
\'96mzaaq	-vp92	little bit of N or little thing like N		=
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 -mlaaq, -mraaq, -mleghaq, -mreghaq, -mzeghaq, -vlaaq, -vleghaq									need examples				little bit of N or little thing like N						\'96mzaaq	mzaq	mzxq	-\uc0\u1084 \u1079 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
\'96mzegagh-	-vps4f4-	little (V a ~)		= -mlaagh-, -mraagh-, -mzaagh-, -mleghagh-, -mreghagh-, -vlaagh-, -vleghagh-									need examples				V a little						\'96mzegagh-	mzegagh	mzegagh	-\uc0\u1084 \u1079 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96mzeghaq	-vps4f2	little bit of N or little thing like N		= -mlaaq, -mraaq, -mzaaq, -mleghaq, -mreghaq, -vlaaq, -vleghaq									need examples				little bit of N or little thing like N						\'96mzeghaq	mzeghaq	mzeghaq	-\uc0\u1084 \u1079 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
-n				
\f2\i see 
\f0\i0 @~:(u)n													device for V-ing; instrument for V-ing						@~:(u)n	n	n	\

\f1\b @~+neq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -ys2\'99	result of V-ing		
\f2\i non-productive; forms are lexicalized; 
\f0\i0 qavaghneq \'91a day and night spent\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); aavneq \'91a half; a half-dollar\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aveg- \'91to divide in two\'92); 
\f2\i drops 
\f0\i0 te 
\f2\i from bases altogether: 
\f0\i0 kumlaneq \'91cold thing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kumlate- \'91to be cold\'92); ikighneq \'91an opening\'92 (from ikighte- \'91to open\'92)	thing associated with V-ing												the result of V-ing; thing associated with V-ing		pb PE n031				
\f1\b @~+neq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub neq2	neq2	-\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 2\

\f1\b ?neq\super 3	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -ys2\'a3	greatest extent (the one or ones which are V to the ~)		
\f2\i used with verbs describing quantifiable qualities; takes possessed endings; 
\f0\i0 aangenghat \'91the largest one of them or the one larger than they are\'92, aangenghit \'91the largest ones of them or the ones larger than they are\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aange- \'91to be large\'92); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  -lleq\super 2	\nosupersub most (the one or ones which are ~ V)	more (the one or ones which are ~ V)											the one or ones which are V to the greatest extent; more (the one or ones which are V to the greatest extent)		pb PE n032				
\f1\b ?neq\super 3	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub neq3	neq3	-\uc0\u1085 \u1099 \u1179 3\
~:(ng)i:ghute-	-\'f83\uc0\u960 b4ens-	become N-less		ng 
\f2\i is used only with bases ending in vowels; 
\f0\i0 gh 
\f2\i is used only if base ends in
\f0\i0  CVgh 
\f2\i where 
\f0\i0 V 
\f2\i is a full vowel (that is, the
\f0\i0  gh 
\f2\i of the postbase is subject to intervocalic uvular droping which will always occur unless a base-final 
\f0\i0 gh
\f2\i  has been dropped since it was between single full vowels); 
\f0\i0 ugingiituq \'91she has lost her husband\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ugi \'91husband\'92, 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *ugingh\ul i\ulnone gh\ul u\ulnone tuq 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  *ugingiutuq); nulighhiituq \'91he has lost his wife\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0  nulighh- \'91wife\'92, 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *nulighh\ul i\ulnone gh\ul u\ulnone tuq 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  *nulighhiutuq); qikmiighutuq \'91he doesn't have dogs anymore\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92, 
\f2\i via 
\f0\i0 qikm\ul i\ulnone gh\ul i\ulnone ghutuq); panigiituq \'91he doesn't have a  daughter anymore\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  panik \'91daughter\'92, 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *panig\ul i\ulnone gh\ul u\ulnone tuq 
\f2\i and 
\f0\i0 *panigiutuq); ighneghiituq \'91he no longer has sons\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighneq son\'92, 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *ighnegh\ul i\ulnone gh\ul u\ulnone tuq 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  *ighneghiutuq); avaqutiighutuq \'91he no longer has children\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  avaqutaq \'91child\'92, 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *avaqut\ul a\ulnone gh\ul i\ulnone ghutuq 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  *avaqutaighutuq); 
\f2\i further examples:
\f0\i0  sikungiituq \'91it has become ice-free\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  siku \'91ice\'92); aawiituq \'91it has lost blood\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aakw \'91blood\'92); angyiighutuq \'91he no longer has a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); umyugiighutuq \'91he has lost his mind\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umyugaq \'91mind\'92); aviighutuq \'91it has disappeared; he is dead\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  avagh- 
\f2\i as in 
\f0\i0 avamsuggaq \'91nothing at all\'92, aviituq \'91it isn\'92t here\'92, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  aviighaa \'91he wiped it away\'92); Tagneghtestaghpenga, \'96 uyavaneng, esghaghaqnaghaatnga ukazit, afsengaat. Natenngam ivaghiniighnaqsinga? Nalluni
\f1\b ighute
\f0\b0 staghpenga! \'91You have turned me black \'96 from the distance the hares and mice will see me. How, then, am I to hunt? You have caused me to 
\f1\b now be without
\f0\b0  any camoflage!\'92 (AANGHHAQ 28)	lose (have lost one\'92s N)												to become N-less; to have lost one's N		pb PE &i3ut0-				~:(ng)i:ghute-	ngighute	ngighute	-(\uc0\u1187 )\u1080 \u1271 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
@~:(ng)igate-	-\'f83\uc0\u960 bufns-	never V		neghigatii \'91he never eats them\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0   \'91he isn't eating them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); qaviigatuq \'91he never sleeps\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he isn't sleeping\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); neghyugigatanka \'91I never want to eat them\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91I don't want to eat them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghyug- \'91to want to eat\'92); iitghigatuq \'91he doesn\'92t come in\'92 
\f2\i or 
\f0\i0 \'91he isn\'92t in the process of coming in now\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to come in\'92); taaqigatuq \'91he never quits\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he isn't quitting right now\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to quit\'92); ng 
\f2\i used only with bases ending in full vowels; 
\f0\i0 qiyangigatuq \'91he never cries, he doesn't cry\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he isn't crying\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); 
\f2\i changes base-final
\f0\i0  t 
\f2\i to
\f0\i0  s; 
\f2\i examples: 
\f0\i0 laalighsigataanga \'91he never  visits me\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he isn't visiting me\'92  (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laalighte- \'91to visit\'92); kaasigatut \'91they never arrive\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  \'91he isn\'92t arriving right now\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); 
\f2\i see also
\f0\i0  -(g)aqe- 
\f2\i of which this postbase is the negative	
\f0\i0 not be V-ing at the present time												to never V; to not be V-ing at the present time		
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 CAY 
\f2\i pb. 
\f0\i0 -(s)ciigate- \'91to be unable to V\'92\'96 
\f2\i partially a cognate				
\f0\i0 @~:(ng)igate-	ngigate	ngigate	-(\uc0\u1187 )\u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
~:(ng)igh-	-\'f83\uc0\u960 bub4-	lose N		ng 
\f2\i used with bases that end in vowels; 
\f0\i0 sikungighaa \'91he removed the ice from it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  siku \'91ice\'92); tuumngightuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tumangightuq \'91it has lots the footprints (that were on it)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuma\super e\nosupersub  \'91track\'92) talliightuq \'91he lost an arm; his arm got injured\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  talliq \'91arm\'92); kemgightuq \'91it has lost its flesh, skin\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kemek \'91flesh, skin\'92)	injured (be injured in one's N)	remove N											to lose N; to be injured in one's N; to remove N		pb PE &i3-				~:(ng)igh-	ngigh-	ngigh-	-(\uc0\u1187 )\u1080 \u1075 \u1080 \u1271 -\
~:(ng)iitaq	-\'f83\uc0\u960 7nf2	protective device for or like N		sigutngiitak \'91earmuffs\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sigun \'91ear\'92); saayngiitaq \'91apron\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  saya\super e\nosupersub  \'91front\'92); nasaghiitaq \'91scarf\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nasaq \'91hood, hat\'92); naasqughiitaq \'91headband\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naasquq \'91head\'92); aqsaqughiitaq \'91snack to keep the stomach from growling\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqsaquq \'91stomach\'92); uullghiitaq \'91brace; device to prevent something from falling over\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ullegh- \'91to fall over\'92)	device to prevent V-ing												protective device for or like N; device to prevent V-ing		PE &ilita3				~:(ng)iitaq	ngitaq	ngxtaq	-(\uc0\u1187 )\u1251 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
:(ng)inagh-	-\'f83\uc0\u960 byf4-	only V		qiyanginaghtuq \'91he goes right on crying\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); neghinaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neghnginaghtuq \'91he only eats, goes right on eating\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); qaviinaghtuq \'91he goes right on sleeping\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); igleghtengnginaamaluteng \'91as they went on traveling\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igleghte- \'91to travel\'92); naavumanginaghtuq \'91it is worsening\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naavuma- \'91to be in a broken state\'92)	go right on V-ing												to only V; to go right on V-ing		pb PE &inna3(-)				:(ng)inagh-	nginagh	nginagh	-(\uc0\u1187 )\u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
~:(ng)inaq*	-\'f83\uc0\u960 byf2	only N		aghniinaat \'91only women\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghnaq \'91woman\'92); yuginaq \'91twenty\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized; from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92)	just N	exactly N											only N; just N; exactly N		pb PE &inna3(-)				~:(ng)inaq*	nginaq	nginaq	-(\uc0\u1187 )\u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
~:(ng)isag-	-\'f83\uc0\u960 bcfu-	lack N		uqiisagtuq \'91he needs seal oil\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uquq \'91seal oil\'92); maningisagtuq \'91he needs money\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mani \'91money\'92); meghisagtuq \'91he needs water\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92)	need N												to lack N; to need N		pb PE &ica!-				~:(ng)isag-	ngisag-	ngisag-	-(\uc0\u1187 )\u1080 \u1089 \u1072 \u1075 -\
~:(ng)isug-	-\'f83\uc0\u960 bceu-	insufficient (have ~ N)		qikmiisugtuq \'91he doesn't have enough dogs\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); Iingunaghhaghmi Sivuqaq pagsingakaaguq tawani tengegkayi
\f1\b isu
\f0\b0 ggaalleghmi allaghlluggaghyugem saam legreyugem. \'91All of Gambell was present, in as much as they had totally 
\f1\b lacked (experience with)
\f0\b0  airplanes (at that time), because it was so different and curiosity provoking.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tengegkayuk \'91airplane\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:54)									check productivity, get more examples				to have insufficient N						~:(ng)isug-	ngisug-	ngisug-	-(\uc0\u1187 )\u1080 \u1089 \u1091 \u1075 -\
~:(ng)ite-	-\'f83\uc0\u960 bns-	lack N or lack the quality of N		nunangituq \'91it lacks land\'92 (from nuna \'91land\'92); puungituq \'91it doesn't have a handle\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  puu \'91handle\'92); tuumngituq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tumangituq \'91it doesn\'92t have footprints or a trail\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuma\super e\nosupersub  \'91footprint\'92); sigutngituq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  sigutangituq \'91it lacks ears\'92( 
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sigun \'91ear\'92); yughaghtengitut \'91they don't have a minister\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yughaghta \'91minister\'92); angyiituq \'91he doesn't have a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); atkugituq \'91he doesn't have a parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92); aatghituq \'91it doesn\'92t have a name\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ateq \'91name\'92); 
\f2\i used with a limited group of verb bases only: 
\f0\i0 puqigituq \'91he lacks intelligence\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  puqig- \'91to be smart\'92); sukangituq \'91it lacks speed, it is slow\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0  suka- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  sukate- \'91to be fast\'92)	not have N or V												to lack N or the quality of V; to not have N or V		pb PE &it-				~:(ng)ite-	ngite	ngite	-(\uc0\u1187 )\u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
~:(ng)ite-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~:(ng)ite-													
\f0\b0 to lack N or the quality of V; to not have N or V						~:(ng)ite-	ite	ite	\
~:(ng)u-	-\'f83\uc0\u960 e-	be N		atanguuq \'91he is a father\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ata \'91father\'92); naanguuq \'91she is a mother\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naa \'91mother\'92); neqnguuq \'91it is food\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqa\super e\nosupersub  \'91food\'92); tuumnguuq \'91it is a footprint\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuma\super e\nosupersub  \'91footprint\'92); sigutnguuq \'91it is an ear\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sigun, siguta \'91ear\'92); gguutnguuq \'91it is a tooth\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  gguta \'91tooth\'92); riigtenguuq \'91it is a den\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  riigta \'91den\'92); aghnaaguq \'91it is a woman\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghnaq \'91woman\'92); qikmiiguq \'91it is a dog\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); nengyuuguq \'91she is a grandmother\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nengyuq \'91grandmother\'92); kaviighuuq \'91it is a fox\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaviiq \'91fox\'92); aatghuuq \'91it is a name\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ateq \'91name\'92); saviguuq \'91it is a knife\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  savik \'91knife\'92); 
\f2\i with weather condition (and similar) nouns:
\f0\i0  eslalluguuq \'91it is raining\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  eslalluk \'91rain\'92); tagituguuq \'91it is foggy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagituk \'91fog\'92); qaniguuq \'91it is snowing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qanik \'91snow in the air\'92); siqineghlluguuq \'91it is very sunny\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  siqineghlluk \'91excessive sun\'92); 
\f2\i may be used in this sense with transitive endings of the subordinative mood:
\f0\i0  unaanguluku \'91when morning came\'92 (
\f2\i irregular, from
\f0\i0  unaaq \'91morning\'92); umegneghuluku \'91when a there was a blizzard\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umegneq \'91blizzard\'92); 
\f2\i with verb bases:
\f0\i0  qavaaguq \'91he is sleeping\'92, qavaawa? \'91is he sleeping?\'92 (
\f2\i the
\f0\i0  w 
\f2\i rather than
\f0\i0  g 
\f2\i here reveals underlying
\f0\i0  au; 
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); qinuyuguuq \'91he is sick\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qinuyug- \'91to get sick\'92); igaghyaaguq \'91he is a student\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igaghyagh- \'91to go to school\'92); elngaatall ghhuutkaqistek tagingulutek? \'91were you\sub 2 \nosupersub very cold as you were coming here?\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come\'92); Neghighluku yuget ipigkingwaaghluteng ayuqaqelghiit uksumi an\'92gineghmeggni napinghit
\f1\b ngu
\f0\b0 luteng. \'91 Long ago men used short boots of shaved sealskin in winter for casual wear when they 
\f1\b were
\f0\b0  not hunting.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  napinghite- \'91to not hunt\'92) (SLI JR. DICT. 66)	weather (for there to be N (~ condition))	be V-ing								while in the process of V-ing			to be N; is N; for there to be N (weather condition); to be V-ing; to be V-habitually or as an occupation; while in the process of V-ing		pb PE -&u-		sentence example from Linda Badten		~:(ng)u-	ngu	ngu	-(\uc0\u1187 )\u1091 -\
~:(ng)ughte-	-\'f83\uc0\u960 e5ns-	become N		sangughtuq \'91it became something; it changed\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sa \'91thing\'92); yughaghtengughtuq \'91he became a minister\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yughaghta \'91minister\'92); 
\f2\i with weather condition nouns a transitive ending with impersonal subject may be used:
\f0\i0  qanigughtaa \'91it is starting to snow\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qanik \'91snow in the air\'92); eslallugughtaa \'91it is starting to rain\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  eslalluk \'91rain\'92); umegneghughsimakanga \'91a blizzard has arisen\'92; (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umegneq \'91blizzard\'92); 
\f2\i but intransitive is also possible,
\f0\i0  qagingughtuq \'91the surf is coming up\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qagi \'91surf\'92); kaftekragughtaa \'91it began to hail\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaftek \'91hail\'92)	weather (for there to start to be N(~ condition))												to become N; for there to start to be N (weather condition)						~:(ng)ughte-	ngughte	ngughte	-(\uc0\u1187 )\u1091 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96ngagh-	-3f4-	habitually V		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 teglengaghtuq \'91he is a thief\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tegleg- \'91to steal\'92); iqlengaghtuq \'91he is a liar\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  iqlu- 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  iqle- 
\f2\i also found in
\f0\i0  iqlumghu- \'91to doubt, be unsure\'92 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  iqlengiqe- \'91to lie\'92)													to habitually V		pb PY-S &a3-2				\'96ngagh-	ngagh	ngagh	-\uc0\u1187 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96nge-	-3s-	acquire N		nunanguq \'91he or it got land\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuna \'91land\'92); neqenguq \'91he got food\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqa\super e\nosupersub  \'91food\'92); ggutenguq \'91he got a tooth or teeth\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  gguta\super e\nosupersub  \'91tooth\'92); qikminguq \'91he got dogs\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); atenguq \'91it got a name\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ateq \'91name\'92); Yugem nuliini pimakanga, "Enta waranwha avaquta
\f1\b ng
\f0\b0 ukut. \'85\'94 \'91The man told his wife, \'93At least we\'92ve 
\f1\b gotten
\f0\b0  children now. \'85\'94\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  avaqutaq \'91child\'92) (UNGIPAGHAGH. 37); Upenghaq aghve
\f1\b nge
\f0\b0 gkaagukut. \'91We 
\f1\b caught
\f0\b0  a whale last spring.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghveq \'91whale\'92) (SLI JR. DICT. 171)	get N (permanently)	obtain N (permanently)								catch N (game)			to acquire N; to get N (permanently); to obtain N (permanently); to catch N (game)		pb PE n0!- and &(0)-				\'96nge-	nge	nge	-\uc0\u1187 \u1099 -\
\'96ngestagh-, \'96ngeltagh-, \'96ngertagh-	-3scnf2. -3sk]nf2. -3sinf2	small way (to V in a ~)		
\f2\i with this postbase full, non-initial vowels on the base are optionally changed to
\f0\i0  e, 
\f2\i perhaps to emphasize the smallness;
\f0\i0  nenglangestaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nenglengestaghtuq \'91he is giggling or tittering\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nenglagh- \'91to laugh\'92); qayungestaghtuq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qayengestaghtuq \'91he had a quick cup of tea\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qayugh- \'91to drink tea\'92)													to V in a small way						\'96ngestagh-, \'96ngeltagh-, \'96ngertagh-	ngestagh	ngestagh	-\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 , -\u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 , -\u1187 \u1099 \u1096 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96ngestaq, \'96ngeltaq, \'96ngertaq	-3scnf2. -3sk]nf2. -3sinf2	small N		
\f2\i with this postbase full, non-initial vowels on the base are optionally changed to
\f0\i0  e, 
\f2\i perhaps to emphasize the smallness;
\f0\i0  angyangestaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  angyengestaq \'91small boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); mangteghangestaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  mangteghengestaq \'91small house\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangteghaq \'91house\'92); saguyangestaq, saguyengestaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  segeyengestaq (
\f2\i but not
\f0\i0  *sageyangestaq) \'91small drum or drum-like thing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  saguyaq \'91drum\'92)	little N												small N; little N						\'96ngestaq, \'96ngeltaq, \'96ngertaq	ngestaq	ngestaq	-\uc0\u1187 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 , -\u1187 \u1099 \u1083 \u1100 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 , -\u1187 \u1099 \u1096 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
@\'96nghhaq	-y5f2	recently (one that has ~ V-ed)		aglanghhaq \'91one who recently went over, went home\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aglagh- \'91to go over, to go home\'92); ighninghhaq \'91newborn baby\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  ighni- \'91to give birth\'92); pugimenghhaq \'91young seal\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  pugime- \'91to swim\'92); anglinghhaq \'91young man or woman\'92 (
\f2\i from 
\f0\i0 angli- \'91to grow\'92); siinghhaq \'91newly formed iced\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sii- \'91for a sheet of ice to form on the surface of water\'92); 
\f2\i with this postbase 
\f0\i0 ten 
\f2\i becomes
\f0\i0  nn 
\f2\i with
\f0\i0  e 
\f2\i inserted after it to prevent an unpermitted cluster of voiceless followed by voiced consonants: 
\f0\i0 kaanneghhaq \'91one who recently arrived\'92 (
\f2\i from 
\f0\i0 kaate- \'91to arrive\'92)													one that has recently V-ed		pb PE n(0)3a3(a3)(-)				@\'96nghhaq	nghhaq	nghhaq	-\uc0\u1085 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
@\'96nghiighte-	-y475ns-	large extent (V to a ~)		qavanghiightuq \'91he's sleeping soundly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); neghenghiightekan \'91if he eats a lot\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  \'91negh<e>- to eat\'92)	big way (V in a ~)								questioned				to V to a large extent; to V in a big way						@\'96nghiighte-	nghighte	nghxghte	-\uc0\u1085 \u1271 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
@\'96nghite-	-y4bns-	not (to ~V)		qiyanghituq \'91he didn't cry\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); neghenghitaa \'91he didn't eat it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); qavanghituq \'91he didn\'92t sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); itenghituq \'91he didn\'92t enter\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to enter\'92); 
\f2\i with this postbase
\f0\i0  ten 
\f2\i becomes
\f0\i0  nn 
\f2\i with
\f0\i0  e 
\f2\i inserted after it to prevent an unpermitted cluster of voiceless followed by voiced consonants:
\f0\i0  kaanneghituq \'91he didn't arriving\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); ingaghhneghituq he didn't lie down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  -llghite-													to not V		pb PE n3it-				@\'96nghite-	nghite	nghite	-\uc0\u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96ngllagh-	-3k]f4-	endeavor to induce one to V		qavangllaghaa \'91he tried to get her to sleep, made her sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); piningllaghaa \'91he's tried to get her to behave, made her behave\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pinigh- \'91to be good\'92); anglingllaghaa \'91he's raising her, growing it, making it grow\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angli- \'91to grow\'92); angyangllaghtuq \'91he is made a boat\'92, angyangllaghaa he is made a boat for her or out of it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); mangteghangllaghtuq \'91he is made a house\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangteghaq \'91house\'92); mengllaghtuq \'91he made water (by melting ice)\'92(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92)	make one V	make N or make N for (him) or out of (it)								induce one to V			to endeavor to induce one to V; to make N (for (him) or out of (it)); to make one V		pb PY &ca3-				\'96ngllagh-	ngllagh	ngllagh	-\uc0\u1187 \u1083 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96ngsi-	-3cb-	briefly V		
\f2\i probably non-productive; 
\f0\i0 qavangsiiq \'91he took a nap\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92)	casually V												to briefly V; to casually V		pb PY &si-				\'96ngsi-	ngsi	ngsi	-\uc0\u1187 \u1089 \u1080 -\
\'96ngu-	-3e-	without N or V		
\f2\i replaces the postbase
\f0\i0  ~\sub sf\nosupersub :(ng)ite-, 
\f2\i (from which it is ultimately derived), when the subordinative mood is used; takes subordinative endings marked by
\f0\i0  -na-, 
\f2\i rather than those marked by
\f0\i0  -lu-; ugingunanga \'91(I) lacking a husband\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ugi \'91husband\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ugingitunga  \'91I don\'92t have a husband\'92); savingunang \'91(you) lacking a knife\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  savik \'91knife\'92; 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  savigituten \'91you don't have a knife\'92); nasaperangunani \'91(he) being without a hat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nasaperaq \'91hat\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 nasaperiituq \'91he doesn't have a hat\'92); sukangunani \'91(he, she, it) being slow\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  suka- \'91speed\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 sukangituq \'91it is slow\'92; 
\f2\i note that the subordinative form 
\f0\i0 sukangunani 
\f2\i has largely been replaced by
\f0\i0  sukangilluni)	lacking N or V												without N or V; lacking N or V						\'96ngu-	ngu	ngu	-\uc0\u1187 \u1091 -\
\'96nguq*	-3e2	one that is V		
\f2\i used only with descriptive or negative verbs ending in
\f0\i0  te; 
\f2\i changes
\f0\i0  te 
\f2\i to
\f0\i0  l; neghenghilnguq \'91one that didn\'92t eat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghenghite- \'91to not eat\'92);  kavilnguut \'91red things\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kavite- \'91to be red\'92); 
\f2\i this morpheme also constitutes the marker of a certain (participial) verb mood having a past implication:
\f0\i0  qavanghilnguq \'91he didn't sleep\'92, qavanghilngunga \'91I didn't sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavanghite- \'91to not sleep\'92); 
\f2\i for non-descriptive verbs the postbase 
\f0\i0 -lghii 
\f2\i (q.v.) is used
\f0\i0   
\f2\i for these functions instead of this postbase 													
\f0\i0 one that is V		pb PY-S &uq				\'96nguq*	nguq	nguq	-\uc0\u1187 \u1091 \u1179 \
-ngwaagh-\super 1				
\f2\i \nosupersub see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 1													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to diligently V; to thoroughly V; to V at the proper time						
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ngwagh1	ngwxgh1	\
-ngwaagh-\super 2				
\f2\i \nosupersub see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 2													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to V in a non-serious way; to pretend to V; to V for something other than the usual purpose; to play at V-ing						~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 2	\nosupersub ngwagh2	ngwxgh2	\
-ngwaaq				see 
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aaq													
\f0\b0 imitation N; artificial N; model N; toy N; pretend N; little bit of N; thing like N						~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aaq	ngwaq	ngwxq	\

\f1\b +ni\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -yb\'99	smell of N		qugaagni \'91sour smell\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qugaak \'91sourness\'92); uuyni \'91body odor\'92 (
\f2\i from an unidentified base
\f0\i0 ); puyani \'91smell of rancid oil\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  puya \'91rancid oil\'92); leghni \'91flatulent smell\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  leq \'91flatus\'92)	odor of N												the smell of N; the odor of N; the taste of N		pb PE nit- and cu!nit- and pa!nit-				
\f1\b +ni\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub ni2	ni2	-\uc0\u1085 \u1080 2\
+niigh-	-y74-	hunt for N or by means of V-ing		
\f2\i used especially (but not exclusively) with bases concerning subsistence activities; 
\f0\i0 manigniightuq \'91he's looking for eggs\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  manik \'91egg\'92);  qawaagniightuq \'91he's hunting birds\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qawaak \'91bird\'92); ayveghniightuq \'91he's hunting walrus\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayveq \'91walrus\'92); angyaghniightuq \'91he's hunting with a boat, using a boat to hunt, or asking for a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  angyagh- \'91to use a boat\'92); piyaaniightuq \'91he's hunting on foot\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  piyaa- \'91to walk\'92); unangniightuq \'91he's hunting seals or other sea mammals\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  unange- \'91to catch seals or other sea mammals\'92); guunniightuq \'91he's shooting at game\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  guute- \'91to shoot\'92); naapniightuq \'91he's trapping\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naapte- \'91to catch with a trap\'92); mughunniightuq \'91he went hunting on the ice\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mughute- \'91to hunt on the ice\'92); 
\f2\i also
\f0\i0 , anagniightuq \'91he\'92s on the run\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  anag- \'91to flee, escape\'92); ugighhniightut \'91they are snarling\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ugighhe- \'91to fight (of dogs)\'92; penniighta \'91shepherd\'92 
\f2\i (in Biblical translation; from
\f0\i0  penniiq \'91sheep\'92)	search for N	ask for N								endeavor to V or to obtain N			to hunt for N; to hunt by means of V-ing; to search for N; to ask for N; to endeavor to V or to obtain N; to carry out the process of V-ing		pb PE ni(C)a3-				+niigh-	nigh	nxgh	-\uc0\u1085 \u1251 \u1271 -\

\f1\b +nite-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -ybns-\'a1	taste of N		taghyughnituq \'91it tastes salty\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taghyuq \'91salt\'92); uqugnituq \'91it tastes moldy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uquk \'91mold\'92)													to taste of N		pb PE nit- and cu!nit- and pa!nit-				
\f1\b +nite-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nite1	nite1	-\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -1\

\f1\b %nite-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -ybns-	in (be ~ N)		
\f2\i a contraction of the non-singular or possessed singular localis ending
\f0\i0  %ni 
\f2\i and the archaic verb base
\f0\i0  ete-; angyanitut \'91they are in the boats\'92, angyaanituq \'91it is in his boat\'92, angyamnituq \'91it is in my boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  -mete-\super 2\nosupersub , -nte-	at (be ~ N)	be at or in N											to be at N; to be in N						
\f1\b %nite-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub nite2	nite2	-\uc0\u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
-nkuk / -nkut				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b %(e)nkuk / %(e)nkut													
\f0\b0 N and partner; N and associate(s); N and family						%(e)nkuk / %(e)nkut	nkuk	nkuk	\
@\'96nqegsagh-	-y2s[cf4-	completely V		ulimanqegsaghaa \'91he redid it correctly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ulima- \'91to make\'92)	correctly V	thoroughly V											to V completely, correctly, thoroughly		< -nqegte-yagh-				@\'96nqegsagh-	nqegsagh	nqegsagh	-\uc0\u1085 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1072 \u1271 -\
@\'96nqegsi-	-y2s[cb-	good with respect to V-ing (be ~)		yugunqegsiiq \'91he is healthy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yugu- \'91to live\'92)													to be good with respect to V-ing						@\'96nqegsi-	nqegsi-	nqegsi-	-\uc0\u1085 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1089 \u1080 -\
@\'96nqegtaq	-y2s[nf2	easily (one that V-s ~)		uzivenqegtaq \'91one that revolves readily\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uzive- \'91to revolve\'92); qelpenqegtaq \'91one that opens easily\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qelpegh- \'91to open\'92); yugunqegtaq \'91healthy person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yugu- \'91to be a person, to live\'92)	readily (one that V-s ~)												one that V-s easily; one that V-s readily		< -nqegte-(g)aq				@\'96nqegtaq	nqegtaq	nqegtaq	-\uc0\u1085 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
@\'96nqegte-	-y2s[ns-	easily V		qelpenqegtuq \'91it opens easily\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qelpegh- \'91to open\'92); yugunqegtuq \'91he is healthy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yugu- \'91to be a person, to live\'92)	readily V												to V easily; to V readily		pb PE nqi!-1 and nqi!ca(C)a3-				@\'96nqegte-	nqegte	nqegte	-\uc0\u1085 \u1179 \u1099 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
@\'96nqigte-	-y2b[ns-	again V		taginqigtuq \'91he came over again\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come over\'92); apenqigtuq \'91he repeated what he said\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  apegh- \'91to tell or confess\'92); nekeggneqigtaa \'91he restored it, but it back as it belonged\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nekegte- \'91to put in the appropriate place\'92)													to V again		pb PE nqi!-2				@\'96nqigte-	nqigte	nqigte	-\uc0\u1085 \u1179 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
+nte-	-yns-	at (be ~ N)		
\f2\i a contraction of the demonstrative adverb localis ending
\f0\i0  +ni 
\f2\i and the archaic verb base ete-; 
\f0\i0 whaantuq \'91it is right here\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  wha(ni) \'91here\'92 
\f2\i (with initial vowel lengthening)); 
\f0\i0 pikantuq \'91it is up above (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pika(ni) \'91up above\'92); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  -mete-\super 2\nosupersub , -nite-\super 2	\nosupersub in (be ~ N)	be at or in N											to be at N; to be in N						+nte-	nte	nte	-\uc0\u1085 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'b1pag-	-gfu-	big way (V in a ~)		
\f2\i marginally productive; 
\f0\i0 esghapag- \'91to watch, to look at\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized; from
\f0\i0  esghagh- \'91to see\'92); napaghpagtuq \'91his hopes rose\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  napagh- 
\f2\i (root)
\f0\i0  \'91erect\'92); tupagpagtuq \'91he got quite startled\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tupag- \'91to get startled\'92); aqfaatepagtuq \'91he ran hard\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqfaate- \'91to run\'92); aghveghapagtuq \'91he killed lots of walrus\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayveghagh- \'91to kill walrus\'92); ggiistutepagtuq \'91he clenched his teeth hard\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ggiistute- \'91to clench one's teeth\'92); qavaghpagtuq \'91he slept for a long time\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); neghepagtuq \'91he ate a lot\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); qepghaghpagtuq \'91he worked hard\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92); tenglugpagaa \'91he punched him hard\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tenglug- \'91to punch\'92); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 -vag-, -ghpak	intensively V	excessively V											to V in a big way; to V intensively; to V excessively		pb PE va!-				\'b1pag-	pag	pag	-\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\

\f1\b +pagaatagh-/~\sub sf\nosupersub vagaatagh-	
\f0\b0 -gfu6nf4- -dfu6nf4-	repeatedly V hard		+pagaatagh- 
\f2\i with consonant-ending bases;
\f0\i0  ~\sub sf\nosupersub vagaatagh- 
\f2\i with vowel-ending bases (a resulting 
\f0\i0 tv 
\f2\i becomes
\f0\i0  p);
\f2\i  used with verbs of hitting, kicking, striking, throwing, etc
\f0\i0 .
\f2\i ; 
\f0\i0 kaksagpagaataghaa \'91he whipped him repeatedly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaksagte- \'91to whip\'92); siingvagaataghaa \'91he pushed him repeatedly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  siinge- \'91to push\'92); ketngigpagaataghaa \'91he kicked it repeatedly with the heel\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ketngig- \'91to kick with the heel\'92); Aantani neghniimsunemta milugh
\f1\b pagaatagh
\f0\b0 aqaghpesikut. \'91Whenever we  happen to be seeking to eat at the dump, you 
\f1\b repeatedly
\f0\b0  throw stuff at us.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  milugh- \'91to throw things at\'92) (UNGIPAGHAGH. 109)													to V repeatedly and hard						
\f1\b +pagaatagh-/~\sub sf\nosupersub vagaatagh-	
\f0\b0 pagatagh	pagatagh	-\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 - -\u1074 \u1072 \u1075 \u257 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96pagigate-	-gfubufns-	infrequently V		qepghapagigatuq \'91he seldom works\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92); Suflugwaq llangaqa atuqe
\f1\b pagigal
\f0\b0 kangat. \'91It seems that they 
\f1\b seldom
\f0\b0  used rifles.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atuqe- \'91to use (it)\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:28)	seldom V												to V infrequently; to seldom V		< -pag-(ng)igate-				\'96pagigate-	pagigate	pagigate	-\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96pagite-	-gfubns-	not much N or V-ness		tengegkayupagituq \'91there aren't many airplanes\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tengegkayuk \'91airplane\'92); nighupagituq \'91it is dim, dull\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nighug- \'91to be bright\'92); ; \'85 entaqun talwa taghnughha
\f1\b pagit
\f0\b0 ukut Agaankuni. \'91\'85 maybe they 
\f1\b had but few
\f0\b0  children still in the Agaq family.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taghnughhaq \'91child\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:40); \'85 ayumiqullghem ilangani kavii
\f1\b pagi
\f0\b0 lluni, ilangakun kaviighyagllagaqluni. \'91\'85 some years there 
\f1\b were few
\f0\b0  foxes, and some years there were many foxes.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaviiq \'91fox\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:174)	few (have ~ N)												for there not to be much N or V-ness; to have few N		< -pag-(ng)ite-				\'96pagite-	pagite	pagite	-\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
+pagnite-	-gfuybns-	smell like N		sapagnituq \'91it smells like something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sa \'91thing, something\'92); anaghpagnituq \'91it smells of excrement\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  anaq \'91excrement\'92); uqugpagnituq \'91it smells moldy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uquk \'91mold\'92)	taste like N												to smell like N; to taste like N		< -ghpak-nite-\super 1				\nosupersub +pagnite-	pagnite	pagnite	-\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'b1pagunghite-	-gfuey4bns-	not be sufficiently V		
\f2\i used with descriptive verb bases; 
\f0\i0 Qavaamalghii elngaatall asivaqun akugaaghhaaneng qava
\f1\b pagunghil
\f0\b0 nguq. \'91The one that 
\f1\b didn\'92t have enough 
\f0\b0 sleep has slept very soundly since yesterday evening.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92) (AYUM. UNGIP. II:30)	insufficiently V												to not be sufficiently V		< -pag-?-nghite-				\'b1pagunghite-	pagunghite	pagunghite	-\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1075 \u1091 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b +palluq / ~\sub f\nosupersub valluq	
\f0\b0 -gfk]/2 -dfk]/2	one with big N		+palluq
\f2\i  with consonant-ending bases;
\f0\i0  ~\sub f\nosupersub valluq
\f2\i  with vowel-ending bases; examples: 
\f0\i0 sighuneghpalluq one with big antlers\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sighuneq \'91antlers\'92); meghpalluq \'91mosly water, one with lots of water\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92); tuumvalluq \'91one with big tracks\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuma\super e\nosupersub  \'91track\'92); sigutfalluq \'91one with big ears\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sigun 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  siguta\super e\nosupersub  \'91ear\'92); sunavalluq \'91mostly soil\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  suna \'91soil\'92); akmaneghpalluq \'91camel\'92 (
\f2\i neologism  sometimes used in Bible translation; from
\f0\i0  akmaneq \'91back load\'92)	mostly N	big (one with ~ N)											one with big N; mostly N		< -pag-?; pb PE va@u!(-)				
\f1\b +palluq / ~\sub f\nosupersub valluq	
\f0\b0 palluq	palluq	-\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179  -\u1074 \u1072 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1179 \
\'b1panghite-	-gfy4bns-	insufficiently V		neghepanghituq \'91he didn't eat enough\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); qavapanghituq \'91he didn't sleep enough\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); qepghapanghituq \'91he didn't work enough\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92)	not V enough												to insufficiently V; to not V enough		< -pag-nghite-				\'b1panghite-	panghite	panghite	-\uc0\u1087 \u1072 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96penaaq	-gsy62	homely N		yupenaaq \'91shabby person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92); angyapenaaq \'91shabby boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92)	shabby N	dilapidated N								ugly N			homely N; shabby N; dilapidated N; ugly N						\'96penaaq	penaq	penxq	-\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1085 \u257 \u1179 \
\'96peraq	-gshf2	small N		nasaperaq \'91hat\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  nasaq \'91parka hood\'92); atkuperaq \'91small or makeshift parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92)	makeshift N	not quite correct N											small N; makeshift N; not quite correct N						\'96peraq	peraq	peraq	-\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96perewaaq	-gshs162	all N or V		unaghsiperewaaq \'91all wood\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  unaghsiq \'91wood\'92); savikenghaaperewaaq \'91all metal\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  savikenghaaq \'91metal\'92) ; sikuperewaaq \'91all ice\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  siku \'91ice\'92); Qate
\f1\b perewaagh
\f0\b0 meng Aatkalek. \'91The One with an 
\f1\b all
\f0\b0  White Garment.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qategh- \'91to be white\'92) (
\f2\i book title; see Slwooko 1977a
\f0\i0 )	only N or V	totally N or V											all, only or totally N or V						\'96perewaaq	perewaq	perewxq	-\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1099 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
\'96peruk	-gsher	like (one ~ N)		angqaperuk \'91round thing, circle, sphere\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 angqaq 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  aangqaq \'91ball\'92)													one like N						\'96peruk	peruk	peruk	-\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1088 \u1091 \u1082 \
\'96pestaagh-	-gscn64-	truly V		sukatepestaaghluku \'91while that (other) one was truly going fast\'92													to truly V		< -pik-(ke)staaq				\'96pestaagh-	pestagh	pestxgh	-\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1271 -\
\'96pestaaq	-gscn62	truly N		qikmipestaaq \'91truly a dog; a dog without a doubt\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); ipapestaaq \'91the absolute truth; most certainly the truth\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ipa \'91the truth\'92); uglapestaaghllak \'91really a lot\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uglaq \'91lots\'92, 
\f2\i with postbase
\f0\i0  -ghllak \'91big\'92); Qemimeng tevyalghiimi esghaghii piluguget seghle
\f1\b pestaagh
\f0\b0 et. \'91When he crossed over the hill he saw lots of 
\f1\b very
\f0\b0  bad garments.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  seghleq \'91bad thing\'92) (UNGIPAGHAGH. 67); Elngaatall taana apeghtughista qepghaqaghlla
\f1\b pestaagh
\f0\b0 uyaghtuq. \'91That teacher 
\f1\b truly
\f0\b0  had many duties.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghaqaghllak \'91lots of work\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:8)													truly N		< -pik-(ke)staaq				\'96pestaaq	pestaq	pestxq	-\uc0\u1087 \u1099 \u1089 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
-pete-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b +fte-/+pete-													
\f0\b0 to evidently V or have V-ed						+fte-/+pete-	pete	pete	\
+pigaq*	-gvuf2	foremost N		
\f2\i at most marginally productive; 
\f0\i0 kingulighpigaq \'91the very last one\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kinguliq \'91follower\'92); inglupigaq \'91one side only\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  inglu \'91opposite\'92); nuyeklighpigaq \'91oldest brother\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuyekliq \'91older brother\'92); qayeghpigaq \'91peak of mountain\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaya\super e\nosupersub  \'91(top) surface\'92); 
\f2\i also apparently in: 
\f0\i0 nukalpigaq \'91man in his prime, good provider\'92 
\f2\i (from an unidentified root)													
\f0\i0 foremost N						+pigaq	pigaq	pigaq	-\uc0\u1087 \u1084 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96pigesnagh-	-gbuscy]f4-	vain (V in ~)		tagipigesnaghtuq \'91he came for naught; he finally came\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come\'92); itepigesnaghtuq \'91he entered in vain; he finally entered\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to enter\'92); kaatepigesnaghtuq \'91he came for no purpose\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92)	naught (V for ~)	finally V											to V in vain; to V for naught; to finally V						\'96pigesnagh-	pigesnagh	pigesnagh	-\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1075 \u1099 \u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96pigte-	-gb[ns-	very (be ~ V)		igatapigtunga \'91I am very hungry\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igatagh- \'91to be hungry\'92); natetepigtuq \'91it is odd\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  natete- \'91to be how?; to be somehow (different)\'92); alingepigtuq \'91he is very scared\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alinge- \'91to be scared\'92); Igaghyaq uglaa
\f1\b pigte
\f0\b0 ftuuq. \'91There were 
\f1\b very
\f0\b0  many students.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uglaa- \'91to be a large quantity\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:210); Unaami unaangu
\f1\b pig
\f0\b0 lluku teghtughluta \'85 \'91We woke up 
\f1\b very
\f0\b0  early in the morning \'85\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  unaangu- \'91for it to be morning\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:140)													to be very V		pb PE -pi!(-)				\'96pigte-	pigte	pigte	-\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1093 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96pigu-	-hbue-	very (be ~ much an N)		seghlepiguuq \'91it is very bad\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  seghleq \'91bad thing\'92); peghqinepiguuq \'91he is very wise\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  peghqineq \'91wise one\'92)													to be very much an N		< -pik-(ng)u-				\'96pigu-	pigu	pigu	-\uc0\u1088 \u1080 \u1075 \u1091 -\
\'96pik	-gbr	real N		nunapik \'91real land\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuna \'91land\'92); neqepik \'91real food\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqa\super e\nosupersub  \'91food\'92); ggutepik \'91real tooth\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  gguta \'91tooth\'92); qayapik \'91authentic, old-fashioned kayak\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qayaq \'91kayak\'92); angyapik \'91skin boat\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized
\f0\i0 , 
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); atkupik \'91authentic parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92); atepik \'91real name\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ateq \'91name\'92); kaviipik \'91red fox\'92 
\f2\i (Vulpes fulva) 
\f0\i0 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  kaviiq \'91(white) fox\'92 
\f2\i (Alopex lagopus))
\f0\i0 ; qutepik \'91mainland; safe, dry land; Chukotka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  quta \'91land (seen from the sea)\'92); \'91Yupik; St. Lawrence Is. or Chukotkan Eskimo\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person)	genuine N	authentic N								old-fashioned N			real N; genuine N; authentic N; old-fashioned N		pb PE -pi!(-)				\'96pik	pik	pik	-\uc0\u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
~+(q/t)uute-	-\'f82-n\uc0\u960 8ns-	group (V as a ~)		
\f2\i takes plural endings only; 
\f0\i0 aqumuutut \'91they all sat down together\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqume- \'91to sit down\'92); neghuutut \'91they are eating\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); nekevuutut \'91they all stood up\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nekeve- \'91to stand up\'92); t 
\f2\i is used with consonant-ending bases; 
\f0\i0 aglaghtuutut \'91they left as a group\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aglagh- \'91to leave\'92); pinaghtuutut \'91they (rivers, etc.) melted (at the same time)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pinagh- \'91to melt\'92); imightuutiit \'91they (acting at the same time) filled them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  imigh- \'91to fill\'92); q 
\f2\i is used with te ending bases, the
\f0\i0  te 
\f2\i being deleted in some case, retained in others (not following a clear pattern, though perhaps only  
\f0\i0 t(e) 
\f2\i from a postbase
\f0\i0  
\f2\i is deleted); 
\f0\i0 kaatquutut \'91they arrived together\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); pellghuquutiit \'91they put aside shares for them\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pellghute- \'91to put aside shares for someone\'92); tagiquutiit \'91they (acting at the same time) brought them in\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagite- \'91to bring/take in\'92)	together (V ~)												to V as a group; to V together						~+(q/t)uute-	qtute	qtxte	-(\uc0\u1179 -\u1090 )\u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
-qaa-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~\'96(g)kaa-													
\f0\b0 to have V-ed; to have been V-ed.		< -(g)kaq\super 1\nosupersub -(ng)u-				@~\'96(g)kaa-	qa	qx	\
-qaayagh-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~\'96(g)kaayagh-													
\f0\b0 to have V-ed fruitlessly; to have V-ed in vain; to have V-ed but. . . .						~\'96(g)kaayagh-	qayagh	qxyagh	\
-qa\super e				
\f2\i \nosupersub see 
\f1\i0\b @~\'96(g)ka\super e									
\f0\b0 \nosupersub disentangle the participial verb use of this morpheme with that of -kaq (q.v.)				the one(s) possessor is V-ing						
\f1\b @~\'96(g)ka\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub qa	qa	\
~\'96qagh-	-2f4-	please V		
\f2\i often used with optative endings; 
\f0\i0 atuqaghhu \'91please use it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to use\'92);  iitqaa \'91please come in\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to come in\'92); aavkaghtuq \'91it burst\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aveg- \'91to divide in half\'92)	just V	suddenly V							used with other moods? less specific meanings (check the other two given here)?	briefly V			please V; just V; suddenly V; briefly		pb PE k(k)a3- and q(q)a3-				~\'96qagh-	qagh	qagh	-\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 -\
~\'96qaghaqe-	-2f4f2s-	intermittently V		
\f2\i used with subordinative endings; 
\f0\i0 nuupniqaghaqluni \'91dying down now and then\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuupnigh- \'91for wind to die down\'92); Amenam Ayngaghlingaawen aqumluni talluluku ivaluni piighhaa nuvagra
\f1\b qaghaq
\f0\b0 luku. \'91Ayngaghlingaawen sat down and started splitting the sinew, but 
\f1\b every now and then
\f0\b0  whe would moisten it with saliva.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuvagragh- \'91to moisten with saliva\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:208)	now and then (V ~)												to intermittently V; to V now and then		< -qagh-(g)aqe-				~\'96qaghaqe-	qaghaqe	qaghaqe	-\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \u1099 -\
-qaghqaq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96kaghqaq													
\f0\b0 something to be used as N; future N						~\'96kaghqaq	qaghqaq	qaghqaq	\
~\'96qaghtagh-	-2f5nf4-	continuously V with back and forth or up and down movement		tuutqaghtaghaa \'91he stepped up and down on it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuute- \'91to step (on)\'92)	back and forth (continuously V with ~ movement)	up and down (continuously V with ~ movement)											to continuously V with back and forth or up and down movement						~\'96qaghtagh-	qaghtagh	qaghtagh	-\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -\
~\'96qaghte-	-2f5ns-	suddenly V		
\f2\i not used with bases ending in
\f0\i0  g 
\f2\i or a full vowel; see also 
\f0\i0 -aghte-;
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 aanqaghtuq \'91he suddenly went out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92); kumlatqaghtuq \'91it suddenly got cold\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kumlate- \'91to get cold\'92); iitqaghtuq \'91he suddenly came in\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to come in\'92); allnguqaghtuq \'91it suddenly dove\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  allngugh- \'91to dive\'92); kaatqaghtuq \'91he or it suddenly caught up\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); nekefqaghtuq \'91he jumped up suddenly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nekeve- \'91to stand\'92); kaapqaghtuq \'91he jabbed himself with something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaape- \'91to poke\'92)													to suddenly V						~\'96qaghte-	qaghte	qaghte	-\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
-qaghte-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~\'96kaghte-													
\f0\b0 to get N; to catch N						~\'96kaghte-	qaghte	qaghte	\
-qanigh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96kanigh-													
\f0\b0 to be rather V; to be fairly V; to V more and more						~\'96kanigh-	qanigh	qanigh	\
+qaq	-2f2	one that is V or that is to the N		
\f2\i used with descriptive verb bases ending in a vowel, and also with positional bases (not productively); 
\f0\i0  uqigtuqaq \'91heavy thing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uqigtu- \'91to be heavy\'92); qaasqaq \'91highest part of beach\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaya\super e\nosupersub  \'91surface\'92); saniqaq \'91one\'92s side\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sani \'91side\'92); 
\f2\i occurs in other postbases: examples:
\f0\i0  
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 -yuqaq \'91person who is good at V-ing\'92; -tuqaq \'91person or thing that has lots of N or that V-s a lot\'92													one that is V; one to the N		pb PE qa3				+qaq	qaq	qaq	-\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
-qaq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(g)kaq													
\f0\b0 one that has V-ed; one that has been V-ed						~\'96(g)kaq	qaq	qaq	\
-qaq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b +kaq													
\f0\b0 raw material for N or for V-ing; something to be V-ed						+kaq	qaq	qaq	\
-qaqe-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\'96(g)kaqe-													
\f0\b0 to have V-ed (him/it)						@~\'96(g)kaqe-	qaqe	qaqe	\
-qaqsagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(g)kaqsagh-													
\f0\b0 to have V-ed fruitlessly; to have V-ed in vain; to have V-ed but. . . .						~\'96(g)kaqsagh-	qaqsagh	qaqsagh	\
\'96qaqu-	-2f2e-	intermittently V		aliiqaquuq \'91the weather is clearing intermittently\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aliigh- for weather to clear\'92); nuukaquuq \'91it surfaced intermittently\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuug- \'91to surface\'92)													to V intermittently				from Willem de Reusse		\'96qaqu-	qaqu	qaqu	-\uc0\u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \u1091 -\
-qataghagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96kataghagh-													
\f0\b0 to finally V despite a feeling that it wouldn't happen; to V at last						~\'96kataghagh-	qataghagh	qataghagh	\
-qayugu-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(g)kayugu-													
\f0\b0 to be able to V; can V						~\'96(g)kayugu-	qayugu	qayugu	\
-qayugughte-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(g)kayugughte-													
\f0\b0 to become able to V						~\'96(g)kayugughte-	qayugughte-	qayugughte-	\
-qayuk				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(g)kayuk													
\f0\b0 one that V-s readily; one who is able to V						~\'96(g)kayuk	qayak	qayak	\

\f1\b -qe-\super 1																	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub have as one\'92s N; object is subject\'92s N; have N						
\f1\b ~\'96ke-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub qe1	qe1	\
-qe-\super 2				
\f2\i \nosupersub see at 
\f1\i0\b ~\'96ke-\super 2													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to feel V toward; to V toward						
\f1\b ~\'96ke-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub qe2	qe2	\
-qegtaq				
\f2\i see at
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96kegtaq													
\f0\b0 one with good N						~\'96kegtaq	qegtaq	qegtaq	\
-qegte-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96kegte-													
\f0\b0 to have good N						~\'96kegte-	qegte	qegte	\
-qenghhaq*				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96kenghhaq*													
\f0\b0 newly made or newly acquired N						~\'96kenghhaq*	qenghhaq	qenghhaq	\
-qestagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96kestagh-													
\f0\b0 to V ahead of time; to V patiently; to V slowly; to V nonchalantly						~\'96kestagh-	qestagh	qestagh	\
-qetagh-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~\'96ketagh-													
\f0\b0 to tend to V by one\'92s disposition						~\'96ketagh-	qetagh	qetagh	\
~\'96qiinagh-	-27yf4-	just V		
\f2\i not used with vowel-ending bases with which 
\f0\i0 -(a)ghesnagh- 
\f2\i (q.v.) is used instead; 
\f0\i0 qavaqiinaghtuq \'91he's just sleeping\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); neqiinaghtuq \'91he's just eating\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); laakiinaghtuq \'91he's just digging\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laag- \'91to dig\'92)	only V	now (V just ~)											to just V; to only V; to V just now		< -qagh-(ng)inagh-; pb PY qa(C)ina3-				~\'96qiinagh-	qinagh	qxnagh	-\uc0\u1179 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96qinghaq	-2by4f2	thing of N		
\f2\i Chukotkan (only?); 
\f0\i0 aghveqinghaq \'91whale sinew or something else from a whale\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghveq \'91whale\'92)									also SLI?				thing of N						\'96qinghaq	qinghaq	qinghaq	-\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1085 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
~\'96qite-	-2bns-	encounter N or V		
\f2\i probably non-productive; 
\f0\i0 umuqituq \'91she ran into a thick part (while sewing skin)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umu- \'91to be thick\'92); sikuqituq \'91he encountered ice\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  siku \'91ice\'92); nunaqituq \'91it ran aground\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuna \'91land\'92); qasqituq \'91he or it reached the top\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaya\super e\nosupersub  \'91(top) surface\'92); qulqituq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  quulqituq \'91he or it reached the top or an upper level\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qula\super e\nosupersub  \'91upper  part\'92)													to encounter N or V						~\'96qite-	qite	qite	-\uc0\u1179 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
\'96qliq*	-2k]b2	far (thing that is ~ to the N direction)		
\f2\i used with positional bases, and the like; 
\f0\i0 sivuqliq \'91frontmost one\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sivu \'91front\'92); tungeqliq \'91follower\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tunga\super e\nosupersub  \'91direction (of possessor)\'92); Imaqliq \'91Big Diomede\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  imaq \'91ocean\'92); kangiqliq \'91thing at inner end, molar\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kangiq \'91indentation\'92); nalleqliq \'91relative, kinsman\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nalla\super e\nosupersub  \'91that which corresponds in time or space\'92); tunuqliq \'91back one\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tunu \'91back\'92); uviqliq \'91neighbor, relative, kinsman\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  uvi- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  uvin \'91yard around house\'92 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  uvinek \'91human skin\'92); uyuqliq \'91younger one\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 uyugh- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  uyughaq \'91younger sibling\'92); iqukliq \'91one at the end\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iquk \'91end\'92); nuyekliq \'91older or oldest one\'92
\f2\i  (from an unidentified root)													
\f0\i0 thing that is far to the N direction		pb PE -qli3				\'96qliq*	qliq	qliq	-\uc0\u1179 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 \u1179 \
\'96qragh-	-2if4-	fancy V-ing		kakiqraghtuq \'91she did fancy sewing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaki- \'91to sew\'92); negikraghtuq \'91she cut out pieces of skin according to a pattern\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negig- \'91to cut a skin or material for sewing\'92)	new (V a ~ thing)												to do fancy V-ing; to V a new thing						\'96qragh-	qragh	qragh	-\uc0\u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1271 -\
-qrak				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96krak													
\f0\b0 small N; thing like N						\'96krak	qrak	qrak	\
\'96qraq	-2if2	fancy piece of of N		igaqraq \'91trim\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igaq \'91design, tattoo\'92); tagneqraq \'91dot, dark spot, mole on skin\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized from
\f0\i0  tagneq \'91darkness\'92); agaqraq \'91peg or hook for hanging things\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized
\f0\i0  
\f2\i from postural root
\f0\i0  agagh- \'91hang(ing)\'92)													fancy piece of of N						\'96qraq	qraq	qraq	-\uc0\u1179 \u1096 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96qrug-	-2ieu-	troublesome (for ~ one to V)		Amigkun emta whanga qineghsuuki
\f1\b qrug
\f0\b0 yalghiinga nateghmi qama Maynga guitaraaqeftuq, elngaatall. \'91And when I \'96 
\f1\b getting into things as I tend to do
\f0\b0  \'96 peeked in, in there in the porch Maynga was playing away on the guitar.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qineghte- \'91to  peek in\'92 
\f2\i with an intervening postbase
\f0\i0 ) (PANGEGH. 36)									examples needed				for troublesome one to V						\'96qrug-	qrug	qrug	-\uc0\u1179 \u1096 \u1091 \u1075 -\
\'96qruk	-2ier	good old N		yukruk \'91good old person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92); angyaqruk \'91good old boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); anuqeqruk \'91good old wind\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  anuqa\super e\nosupersub  \'91wind\'92); ellngaqruk \'91he (being how he is)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ellnga \'91he\'92); Aghnaghaat atateng akisimaaqegkangit, Umiilgu
\f1\b qruk
\f0\b0 , kitum kakilleqeftagu? \'91The girls answered their father, (saying) \'93
\f1\b lousy 
\f0\b0 Umiilgu, who would ever sew for him?\'94\'92 (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 44)	bad old N	troublesome N							find out more about the meaning				good old N; bad old N (paradoxically); troublesome N						\'96qruk	qruk	qruk	-\uc0\u1179 \u1096 \u1091 \u1082 \
-qsagute-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ksagute-													
\f0\b0 to acquire as one's N						\'96ksagute-	qsagute	qsagute	\

\f1\b ?qu-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -2e-\'a1	hunt N		tungtuquuq \'91he's hunting caribou\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tungtu \'91caribou\'92); unkusequuq \'91he checked his traps\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  unkusa\super e\nosupersub  \'91trap\'92); lluuquuq \'91he is hunting with a sling\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  lluu \'91sling\'92)	hunt with (using) N												to hunt N; to hunt with (using) N						
\f1\b ?qu-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub qu1	qu1	-\uc0\u1179 \u1091 -1\

\f1\b \'96qu-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -2e-\'99	repeatedly V (hit)		
\f2\i used with verbs dealing with \'93hitting\'94; 
\f0\i0 qugaquuq \'91it is pecking away at something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qugagh- \'91to peck\'92); repaquuq \'91he is hammering repeatedly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  repa- \'91to hit with a hammer\'92); tuutaquuq \'91he\'92s stepping lightly and repeatedly; a gentle rain is falling\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuute-\super 1\nosupersub  \'91to step\'92 
\f2\i and an intervening postbase
\f0\i0 ); retwhaqwaat \'91they are repeatedly bombarding it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  retwha- \'91to bombard\'92)													to repeatedly V (hit)						
\f1\b \'96qu-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub qu2	qu2	-\uc0\u1179 \u1091 -2\
@qugh-	-2e4-	all (V ~ things available)		
\f2\i used only with bases that end in
\f0\i0  te 
\f2\i which is then dropped; 
\f0\i0 kagimqughaa \'91he crushed it completely\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kagimte- \'91to crush\'92); kaaguqughtuq \'91he struck everything\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaagute- \'91to strike\'92); ayemqughaa \'91he broke it to pieces\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayemte- \'91to break\'92); aafqughaa \'91he divided it completely\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aafte- \'91to divide\'92); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  ?ugh-	completely V												to V all things available; to V completely		pb PE (C)u3-				@qugh-	qugh	qugh	-\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1271 -\
~\'96qumtaaq	-2evn62	frequently V-ed thing		atuqumtaaq \'91a frequently used thing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atugh- \'91to use\'92); aafkumtaaq \'91something frequently halved\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aveg- \'91to divide in two\'92); neghqumtaaq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  nequmtaaq \'91something commonly eaten\'92, nequmtaaghuuq \'91it is commonly eaten\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); piniqumtaaq \'91boyfriend; girlfriend\'92 (
\f2\i irregularly from
\f0\i0  pinigh- \'91to be good\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  piniqe- \'91to like\'92); ilaqumtaaq \'91friend\'92 (
\f2\i from noun 
\f0\i0  ila \'91relative, friend, one of\'92); aksaqumtaaq \'91secret\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  
\f2\i root
\f0\i0  aksa(q) \'91secret\'92 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  aksaqe- \'91to keep a secret\'92); sasiqumtaaq \'91custom\'92 (
\f2\i from 
\f0\i0 sasiq \'91activity, practice\'92)	usually V-ed thing	commonly V-ed thing											frequently V-ed thing; usually V-ed thing; commonly V-ed thing						~\'96qumtaaq	qumtaq	qumtxq	-\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1084 \u1090 \u257 \u1179 \
-qun				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b \'96kun													
\f0\b0 in the next N; in the future N						\'96kun	qun	qun	\
?quq	-2e2	
\f2\i anatomical suffix		a common final syllable on anatomical words; meaning undetermined; 
\f0\i0 uyaquq \'91neck\'92; tangtaquq \'91cartilage\'92; segesquq \'91knee\'92; alangquq \'91ring finger\'92; iqelquq \'91little finger\'92; ighsaquq \'91heart\'92; eslequq \'91rear flipper of seal or walrus\'92; iilquq \'91brain\'92; mangalquq \'91callus\'92; melquq \'91fur, feather, body hair\'92; mengquq \'91goose bump, feather stem on plucked bird skin\'92; naasquq \'91head\'92; papasquq \'91fish tail\'92; talliquq \'91back fin\'92; taquq \'91side of face\'92; yaquq \'91wing\'92; angangarquq or aanngerquq \'91ankle bone\'92; aqsaquq \'91stomach organ\'92; 
\f2\i perhaps also: 
\f0\i0 akangquq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  kaangquq \'91knot in wood\'92; tequq \'91urine\'92; naangquq \'91piece of ivory\'92; kukingquq \'91ivory hook\'92; ilangquq \'91clear chunk of fresh ice\'92; uquq \'91oil, fat, blubber\'92													
\f2\i anatomical suffix		
\f0\i0 pb PE -qu3				?quq	quq	quq	-\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
-qusiigh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96kusiigh-													
\f0\b0 to casually V; to slowly V						\'96kusiigh-	qusigh	qusxgh	\
?qutaq	-2enf2	device associated with N or with V-ing		
\f2\i probably non-productive; 
\f0\i0 qavaqutaq \'91sleeping potion, or the like\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); aghveghqutaq \'91blade of whaling harpoon\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghveq \'91whale\'92); ighivgaqutaq \'91dinner\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighivgaq \'91evening\'92; miluqutaq \'91edible sea creature with tough skin and red insides\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  milugh- \'91to throw\'92 
\f2\i (said to be so called because they are thrown to the ground to soften the meat)); 
\f0\i0 napaqutaq \'91stake\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  napa \'91post\'92 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  napagh(te)- \'91to affix upright\'92); agalqutaq \'91peg for hanging things\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  agagh(te)- \'91to hang\'92); asiliqutaq \'91something put under a thing to raise it, to protect the surface underneath, catch a leak, etc.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  asiligh- \'91to provide with an underpart\'92); nalluniilkutaq \'91marker\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nalluniite- \'91to be readily visible\'92) 
\f2\i perhaps also in
\f0\i0  avaqutaq \'91child, offspring\'92; Ameriigaghallghi tamaakut qupnegh
\f1\b qutagh
\f0\b0 qat, eslegellghi kiiwhtagh
\f1\b qutagh
\f0\b0 qat, iqallugh
\f1\b qutagh
\f0\b0 qat, negaghpagkat. \'91The thiner twine was used for bering cisco 
\f1\b nets
\f0\b0 ; the thicker twine was for arctic char and larger salmon 
\f1\b nets
\f0\b0 .\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qupneq, kiiwhtaq, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  iqalluk \'96 types of fish) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:24)													device associated with N or with V-ing						?qutaq	qutaq	qutaq	-\uc0\u1179 \u1091 \u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
-quute-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~+(q/t)uute-													
\f0\b0 to V as a group; to V together						~+(q/t)uute-	qute	qxte	\
-quvinghaq				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b \'96kuvinghaq													
\f0\b0 remains of N						\'96kuvinghaq	quvinghaq	quvinghaq	\
?qwaaq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ?kwaaq													
\f0\b0 leftover N						?kwaaq	qwaq	qwxq	\
\'96qwaaqun	-2162ey	later (a little ~ in the N)		
\f2\i used with time words, yields particles; 
\f0\i0 aghneqwaaqun \'91later today\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghneq \'91day\'92); kinguvaqwaaqun \'91later on\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kinguvaq \'91time after\'92); ellmakwaakun \'91some other time\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  ellmaa-  \'91little bit\'92); maateqwaakun \'91shortly\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  maate- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  maaten \'91now\'92)													a little later in the N						\'96qwaaqun	qwaqun	qwxqun	-\uc0\u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \u1091 \u1085 \
+raaghaq	-h64f2	new N		igaghvigraaghaq \'91new school\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igaghvik \'91school\'92)									more examples needed				new N		< -raaq-ghaq				+raaghaq	raghaq	rxghaq	-\uc0\u1088 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96raaghinaq*	-h64byf2	nothing but N		ungagaraaghinaq \'91nothing but reindeer moss\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ungagaq \'91reindeer moss\'92); meraaghinaghllak \'91nothing but the sea\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92); neghqwaaraaghinaq \'91nothing but bones\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghqwaaq \'91bone\'92); piniraaghinaq \'91the best possible thing (considering everything)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pinigh- \'91to be good\'92); Naqam yugilnguut taawanginaq aghna
\f1\b raaghina
\f0\b0 at unegtekaalghiit. \'91Consequently there were no men there; 
\f1\b nothing but 
\f0\b0 women were left.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghnaq \'91woman\'92) (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 45)	just N	only N											nothing but N; just N; only N		< -?-(ng)inaq				\'96raaghinaq	raghinaq	rxghinaq	-\uc0\u1088 \u257 \u1271 \u1080 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
+raak	-h6r	like (thing ~ N)		qayuutaghraak \'91washtub, trough\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qayuutaq \'91wooden tray\'92); akmagtaghraak \'91handbag\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akmagtaq \'91backpack\'92); tepraak \'91bad smell\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tepa\super e\nosupersub  \'91smell\'92); qanigraak \'91light continual snowfall\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qanik \'91snowfall\'92); pekuutaghraak \'91northern shoveler duck 
\f2\i (Anas clypeata)
\f0\i0 ; ray; skate\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pekuutaq \'91shovel\'92); igaghraak \'91granite or other spotted rock\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igaq \'91design, tattoo\'92); 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  -yaak													thing like N						+raak	rak	rxk	-\uc0\u1088 \u257 \u1082 \
\'96raaq	-h62	new-fangled N (as opposed to traditional style N)		qaliraaq \'91rubber or plastic raincoat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaliq \'91gut raincoat\'92); allighteraaq \'91knit sock\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  allighta \'91skin sock\'92); kameraaq \'91rubber boot\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kamek \'91skin boot\'92); kuyngeraaq \'91sacrificial vessel (?)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuynga\super e\nosupersub  \'91pipe (for smoking)\'92)	modern N												new-fangled N (as opposed to traditional style N); modern N						\'96raaq	raq	rxq	-\uc0\u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
+raghaq	-hf4f2	new (brand ~ N)		angyaghraghaq \'91brand new boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); atkugraghaq \'91brand new parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92)													brand new N						+raghaq	raghaq	raghaq	-\uc0\u1088 \u1072 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96rkaggaq	-irf[f2	slightly (one that is ~ V)		nenglaghnarkaggaq \'91a thing that is slightly funny\'92; Waranqun naama ighnimaanga peghqine
\f1\b rkagga
\f0\b0 alunga. \'91At any rate my mother gave birth to me and I am a 
\f1\b little
\f0\b0  wise.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  peghqineq \'91wise, clever one\'92) (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 83)	little (one that is a ~ bit V)												one that is a little bit V; one that is slightly V		pb PE 9ka3, and -ggaq				\'96rkaggaq	rkaggaq	rkaggaq	-\uc0\u1096 \u1082 \u1072 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96rkapik	-irfgbr	one that is very V		Umiilguuy! Umiilguuy! Pini
\f1\b rkapig
\f0\b0 uuten. \'91Umiilgu!, Umiilgu! You are a 
\f1\b very 
\f0\b0 fine person.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pinigh- \'91to be good\'92) (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 45); Kayengenghaghhaq taana neqni
\f1\b rkapi
\f0\b0 ggaq. \'91That sculpin was 
\f1\b sure
\f0\b0  delicious.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqnigh- \'91to be tasty\'92) (UNGIPAGHAGH. 50)	very (one that is ~ V)												one that is very V		pb PE 9ka3, and -pik				\'96rkapik	rkapik	rkapik	-\uc0\u1096 \u1082 \u1072 \u1087 \u1080 \u1082 \
\'96rqwaaq	-i2162	old N		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 mangtegharqwaaq \'91old house\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangteghaq \'91house\'92); =
\f2\i -
\f0\i0 -lqwaaq, -sqwaaq													old N		pb PY-S v$03a3-				\'96rqwaaq	rqwaq	rqwxq	-\uc0\u1096 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
\'96rraak	-i6r	crude N		= \'96llaak; atkurraak \'91bad parka\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  atkuk \'91parka\'92); mangtegharraak \'91shabby house\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangteghaq \'91house\'92); Gaaghuteggu neghesteggu tuugka
\f1\b rraag
\f0\b0 meng, giima
\f1\b rraag
\f0\b0 meng, iquya
\f1\b rraag
\f0\b0 meng. \'91Cook for him and let him eat the 
\f1\b discarded
\f0\b0  harpoon heads, shanks and tips.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuugkaq, giimaq \'91shank\'92, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  iquyaq \'91harpoon parts (various)\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:262)	clumsy N	bad N								discarded N			crude N; clumsy N; bad N; shabby N; discarded N						\'96rraak	rrak	rrxk	-\uc0\u1096 \u257 \u1082 \
+(s)ta	-\'f8c\uc0\u960 nf	habitual V-er		yughaghta \'91preacher\'92, yughaghtet \'91minister, preacher\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yughagh- \'91to pray\'92); ggutangighta \'91dentist\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ggutangigh- \'91to remove teeth\'92); gaaghta \'91cook\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  gaagh- \'91to cook\'92); eslaniighta \'91weatherman\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  eslaniigh- \'91to deal with the weather\'92); igaghta \'91writer\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igagh- \'91to write\'92); penniighniighta \'91shepherd\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  penniighniigh- \'91to deal with (herd, hunt, etc.) sheep\'92); s 
\f2\i is used with bases that end in a vowel: 
\f0\i0 igleghasta \'91traveler\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iglegha- \'91to travel\'92); kelengakista \'91watchman, guard\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kelngaki- \'91to guard things\'92); tengaasta \'91pilot\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tengaa- \'91to fly\'92); Yugulighista \'91the Savior\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yugulighi- \'91to save people\'92); apeghtughista \'91teacher\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  apeghtughi- \'91to teach people\'92)	occupation (one who V-s as an ~)	one who V-s as an occupation											habitual V-er; one who V-s as an occupation						+(s)ta	sta	sta	-(\uc0\u1089 )\u1090 \u1072 \
\'96saag-	-c9u-	strange (V in a ~ way)		= -yaag-; kakisaagtuq \'91she's sewing in a strange way\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaki- \'91to sew\'92)	weirdly V												to V in a strange way; to V weirdly						\'96saag-	sag	sxg	-\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u772 \u1075 -\
-saag-																	to V in a strange way; to V weirdly							sag	sxg	\
-saaghte-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaaghte-													
\f0\b0 to learn to V							saghte	sxghte	\
+sagh-	-cz4-	cause one to V or be V-ed		pinighsaghtuq \'91he made himself nice\'92, pinighsaghaa \'91he made her presentable\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pinigh- \'91to be good\'92); ipegsaghaa \'91he sharpened it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ipeg- \'91to be sharp\'92)	endeavor to V								check \'91endeavor\'92; could be a different postbase				to cause one to V or be V-ed; to endeavor to V		pb PE ca3-1				+sagh-	sagh	sagh	-\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 -\
-sagh-\super 1	\nosupersub -z4-\'a1			
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yagh-\super 1													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to go somewhere in order to V; to go V-ing; to go to celebrate N; to hunt N							sagh1	sagh1	-\uc0\u1103 \u1271 -1\
-sagh-\super 2				
\f2\i \nosupersub see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yagh-\super 2													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to V but \'85; to V in vain; to V without the desired results							sagh2	sagh2	\
+saghagh-	-cz4f4-	try to induce one to V		= seghagh-; 
\f2\i this is a \'93compound verbal\'94 postbase;
\f0\i0  qiyasaghaghaa \'91he tried to make her cry\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); neghesaghaghaa \'91he tried to get her to eat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); nenglaghsaghaghaa \'91he tried to make her laugh\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nenglagh- \'91to laugh\'92); ingaghtesaghaghaa \'91he tried to get her to lie down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); tuqutesaghaghaa \'91he tried to get someone to kill it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqute- \'91to kill\'92)	induce one to V												to try to induce one to V						+saghagh-	saghagh	saghagh	-\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
-saghagh-	-z4f4-			
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghagh-													
\f0\b0 V early							saghagh	saghagh	-\uc0\u1103 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
-saghaq				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghaq													
\f0\b0 device for V-ing; place for V-ing							saghaq	saghaq	\
-saghpete-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghpete-													
\f0\b0 to evidently have V-ed but in vain							saghpete	saghpete	\
-saghqaa-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghqaa-													
\f0\b0 to need to V; to be supposed to V; to V in the future							saghqa	saghqx	\
-saghqaaghte-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghqaaghte-													
\f0\b0 to become necessary to V; to have to V now							saghqaghte	saghqxghte	\
-saghqaq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghqaq													
\f0\b0 something that will V or be V-ed							saghqaq	saghqaq	\
-saghqaqe-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghqaqe-													
\f0\b0 to need to V; to be supposed to V; to V in the future							saghqaqe	saghqaqe	\
+saghtugh-	-cz5ne4-	hunt N		neghsaghsaghtughtuq \'91he hunted seals\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghsaq \'91seal\'92); ayveghsaghtughtuq \'91he hunted walrus\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayveq \'91walrus\'92); kaviighsaghtughtuq \'91he hunted foxes\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaviiq \'91fox\'92); 
\f2\i said to be more specific than
\f0\i0  -yagh-\super 3 \sub  
\f2\i \nosupersub (q.v.)													
\f0\i0 to hunt N						+saghtugh-	saghtugh	saghtugh	-\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1203 \u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -\
-saghtugh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaghtugh-													
\f0\b0 to be about to V; to go somewhere to V							saghtugh	saghtugh	\
-sagute-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yagute-													
\f0\b0 to reach a state of V-ing							sagute	sagute	\
\'96sak	-czr	one who V-s		
\f2\i marginally productive; often has a negative connotation; 
\f0\i0 aklumasak \'91very poor person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akluma- \'91to be needy\'92); alingtasak \'91coward\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alingtagh- \'91to be cowardly\'92); iqlengasak \'91liar\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iqlenga- \'91to be a liar\'92); teglengasak \'91thief\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  teglenga- \'91to be thief\'92)	habitual V-er												one who V-s; habitual V-er						\'96sak	sak	sak	-\uc0\u1089 \u1103 \u1082 \
-saq				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~:(u)saq													
\f0\b0 something that has been V-ed						@~:(u)saq	saq	saq	\
-saquna-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yaquna-													
\f0\b0 don't ever V!							saquna	saquna	\
+seghagh-	-cs4f4-	try to induce one to V		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 alingseghagh- \'91to try to scare, to purposely frighten (in order to \'93teach one a lesson\'94)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alinge- \'91to be frightened\'92); = saghagh-	induce one to V												to try to induce one to V						+seghagh-	seghagh	seghagh	-\uc0\u1089 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\

\f1\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96gga-/~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96ghha-	
\f0\b0 -[6- - -56-	
\f2\i command former		forms commands, requests, etc. directed toward the future; takes intransitive participial endings and yields forms having a future optative meaning; the form with
\f0\i0  gg 
\f2\i is used with
\f0\i0  g-
\f2\i ending bases: 
\f0\i0 ukiggaaten \'91(you) go down (in the future)\'92(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ukig- \'91to go down\'92); 
\f2\i the form with
\f0\i0  ghh 
\f2\i is used with
\f0\i0  gh-
\f2\i ending bases; 
\f0\i0 qavaghhaaten \'91(you) sleep (fut.)\'92(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); iitghaaten \'91(you) come in (fut.)\'92(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to come in\'92); aglaghhaakut \'91let\'92s go home (fut.)\'92(
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aglagh- \'91to go home\'92);
\f2\i with first person singular
\f0\i0  
\f2\i ending
\f0\i0  aa 
\f2\i becomes
\f0\i0  ii: aglaghhiinga \'91I should go home\'92(fut.)\'92; 
\f2\i with vowel-ending bases the postbase
\f0\i0  -lghaa- 
\f2\i (q.v.)
\f0\i0  
\f2\i is used instead; for transitives the postbase
\f0\i0  -na-\super 1\nosupersub  
\f2\i (q.v.) is used instead	request former												command or request former						
\f1\i0\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96gga-/~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96ghha-	
\f0\b0 gga	gga	-\uc0\u1093 \u257 - - -\u1203 \u257 -\

\f1\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96ghhalek	
\f0\b0 -5fksr	how V it is!		
\f2\i forms exclamations (and therefore erhaps better classified as a \'93minor \'93mood marker than a postbase); 
\f0\i0 igamsiqanaghhalek \'91thank you\'92, 
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , \'91how it causes one to be thankful!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igamsiqanagh- \'91to cause one to be thankful\'92); seghleghhalek 
\f2\i paradoxically
\f0\i0 , \'91how wonderful!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  seghleq \'91bad thing\'92); sukaghhalek \'91how fast!\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 suka- \'91speed\'92); sungaghaghhalek \'91how rosy-cheeked!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sugagha \'91redness in the cheeks\'92); pinighhalek \'91how good!, how nice!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pinigh- \'91to be good, nice\'92); iipghalek \'91how sharp!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ipeg- \'91to be sharp\'92); sullevneghhalek \'91so inconsiderate!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sullevneq \'91inconsiderate person\'92)	how much N it has!												how V it is!; how much N it has!		< ghhaq-lek (?)				
\f1\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub \'96ghhalek	
\f0\b0 ghhalek	ghhalek	-\uc0\u1203 \u1072 \u1083 \u1099 \u1082 \

\f1\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub :(e)sqe-	
\f0\b0 -\'f8s\uc0\u960 c2s-	ask one to V		
\f2\i this is a \'93compound verbal\'94 postbase; 
\f0\i0 tagisqaa \'91he asked him to come\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagi- \'91to come over\'92); laalightesqaa \'91he asked him to visit\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  laalighte- \'91to visit\'92); iitghesqaa \'91he asked him to come in\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to come in\'92); aghveliighesqaa \'91he asked him to cook whale\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghveliigh- \'91to cook whale\'92); pumsugesqaa \'91hed asked someone to pinch it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pumsug- \'91to pinch\'92); keniisqaa \'91he asks someone to point at it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kenigh- \'91to point\'92, 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *kenighesqaa); 
\f2\i if intervocalic
\f0\i0  gh is 
\f2\i deleted due to this postbase, the result is always
\f0\i0  ii 
\f2\i and never 
\f0\i0 aa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  uu: qaviisqaa \'91he asked him to sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92, 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *qav\ul a\ulnone gh\ul e\ulnone sqaa); mayiisqaa \'91he asked him to go up\'92 (from mayugh- \'91to go up\'92, 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *may\ul u\ulnone gh\ul e\ulnone sqaa); Uka qamuullghiit nemeng esghaneghmegteki \'85 siivanlleghet kayagtaqiit mekelghiighet paayghi
\f1\b sqe
\f0\b0 lluki, \'85 'Whenever they saw from the house those pulling sleds coming in, the elders would urge the boys (
\f1\b telling
\f0\b0  them) to go meet and help them, \'85' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  paayghi- 'to go meet and help someone coming') (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:130)	tell one to V												to ask one to V; to tell one to V		pb PE -9q0-				
\f1\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub :(e)sqe-	
\f0\b0 esqe	esqe	-(\uc0\u1099 )\u1089 \u1179 \u1099 -\

\f1\b +si-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -cb-\'a1	work on or with N		angyaghsiiq \'91he worked on a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); mangteghaghsiiq \'91he worked on a house\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangteghaq \'91house\'92); ulaaghsiiq \'91she worked with a semi-lunar knife\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ulaaq \'91semi-lunar knife\'92)													to work on or with N						
\f1\b +si-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub si1	si1	-\uc0\u1089 \u1080 -1\

\f1\b +si-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -cb-\'99	acquire lots of N		nunasiinga \'91I acquired lots of land\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuna \'91land\'92); qikmighsiiq \'91he got lots of dogs\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); angyaghsiiq \'91he got lots of boats\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92)	get lots of N												to acquire lots of N; to get lots of N		pb PE -ci-				
\f1\b +si-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub si2	si2	-\uc0\u1089 \u1080 -2\
-sigate-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b +(te)sigate-													
\f0\b0 to prevent or keep one from V-ing; to not allow one to V; to not let one V						+(te)sigate-	sigate	sigate	\
+sigh-	-cb4-	wait for (it) to V		aghyughsighaa \'91he let it age\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghyugh- \'91to age\'92); anglisaghaa \'91he raised him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angli- \'91to grow\'92); aghisighaa \'91he soaked it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghi- \'91to get wet\'92)	cause to V												to wait for (it) to V; to cause to V		pb PE -c(c)i3-				+sigh-	sigh	sigh	-\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1271 -\
+sighagh-	-cb4f4-	arrange for one to V		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 ayuqesighag- \'91to mimic\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayuqe- \'91to be like\'92); piitesighagh- \'91to plant\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  piite- \'91to sprout\'92)	provide for one to V												to arrange or provide for one to V						+sighagh-	sighagh	sighagh	-\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96sighwaagh-	-cb4164-	pretend to V		qepghasighwaaghtuq \'91he pretending to work\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qepghagh- \'91to work\'92);  inghusighwaaghtuq \'91he pretended to pick berries, picking them really trying\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  inghu- \'91to pick berries\'92); Aghnaamkamillu amik ume
\f1\b sighwaagh
\f0\b0 luku reghilqughlluku esghapagaqelghiikung. \'91Aghnaamkami and I would 
\f1\b pretend
\f0\b0  to close the door leaving it ajar so that we could watch.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umeg- \'91to close\'92) (SIVUQ. UNGIP. 3:92)	effort (V without putting ~ into it)	half-heartedly V											to pretend to V; to V without putting effort into it; half-heartedly V						\'96sighwaagh-	sighwagh	sighwxgh	-\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1271 \u1265 \u257 \u1271 -\
+siigh-	-c74-	get lots of N		quugsiightuq \'91he gathered lots of wood\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  quuk \'91firewood\'92); Kaviighhaq pii Meteghllugllagem, "Kii, naqamalla naken neqe
\f1\b siigh
\f0\b0 sin?" \'91Raven said to Fox, \'93Gosh, where did you 
\f1\b get all that 
\f0\b0 food?\'94\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqa\super e\nosupersub  \'91food\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:232)	gather lots of N	lots (get or gather ~ of N)											to get lots of N; to gather lots of N						+siigh-	sigh	sxgh	-\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1271 -\
-siilliqe-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96yiilliqe-													
\f0\b0 to have trouble V-ing							silliqe	sxlliqe	\
\'96siiq	-c72	something like N		qikmisiiq \'91something like a dog\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); avlawasiiq \'91something like flour\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  avlawa \'91flour\'92); angyasiiq \'91something like a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); = -msiiq													something like N						\'96siiq	siq	sxq	-\uc0\u1089 \u1251 \u1179 \
-siite-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96yiite-													
\f0\b0 to poorly V habitually							site	sxte	\
?siq	-cb2	
\f2\i month name former (time of N)		non-productive month-name former; 
\f0\i0 Nazighaghsiq \'91February\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nazighaq \'91ring seal\'92); Teghiglugsiq \'91March\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  teghigluk \'91young bearded seal\'92); Kaneghlengesiq 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  Kaneghyengesi(q) \'91December\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaneq \'91frost\'92)													month of N						?siq	siq	siq	-\uc0\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
-siq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(u)siq													
\f0\b0 device for V-ing; instrument for V-ing						@~:(u)siq	siq	siq	\
\'96sluvegaq	-ck]/duf2	little N		aghnalqwaasluvegaq \'91little old lady\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghnalqwaaq \'91old lady\'92); yusluvegaq \'91little man\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91man\'92); 
\f2\i can occur doubled; 
\f0\i0 taghnughhasluvegasluvegaq \'91teeny child\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taghnughhaq \'91child\'92)													little N						\'96sluvegaq	sluvegaq	sluvegaq	-\uc0\u1089 \u1083 \u1100 \u1102 \u1074 \u1075 \u1072 \u1179 \
-snaanghite-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b +(te)snaanghite-													
\f0\b0 to tell one not to V in the future; to forbid one from V-ing in the future						+(te)snaanghite-	snanghite-	snxnghite-	\
-snanigh-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b +(te)snanigh-																			
\f0\b0 +(te)snanigh-	snanigh	snanigh	\
\'96sngwaaghaq	-c31]64f2	tiny N		yusngwaaghaq \'91tiny man\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person, man\'92)	small N	little N							more examples needed				tiny N; very small N; very little N						\'96sngwaaghaq	sngwaghaq	sngwxghaq	-\uc0\u1089 \u1187 \u1265 \u1100 \u257 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
-sqe-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub :(e)sqe-													
\f0\b0 to ask one to V; to tell one to V						
\f1\b ~\sub sf\nosupersub :(e)sqe-	
\f0\b0 sqe	sqe	\
\'96squghhaq*	-c2e5f2	small N		angyasqughhaq \'91small boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); yusqughhaq \'91small man\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person, man\'92); Iwernga generator-es
\f1\b qughhaak 
\f0\b0 atughaqagput wetku uqulgunemta. \'91We use the 
\f1\b little
\f0\b0  generator but only when we have gas.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  \'93generator\'94 
\f2\i which is used in the dual) 
\f0\i0 (KALLAG. 39)	little N	tiny N											very small N; very little N; tiny N		< -squq-ghhaq				\'96squghhaq*	squghhaq	squghhaq	-\uc0\u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1203 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96squllgaq	-c2ek][f2	one with small N		iyesqullgaq \'91one with small eyes\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iya\super e\nosupersub  \'91eye\'92); angyasqullgaq \'91one with a small boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92)	small (one with ~ N)												one with small N		< -squq-llek-ghhaq				\'96squllgaq	squllgaq	squllgaq	-\uc0\u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1093 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96squq	-c2e2	small N		angyasquq \'91small boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); nunasquq \'91small land or village\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuna \'91land, village\'92)	little N												small N; little N						\'96squq	squq	squq	-\uc0\u1089 \u1179 \u1091 \u1179 \
\'96sqwaaq	-c2162	old N		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 mangteghasqwaaq \'91old house\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangteghaq \'91house\'92); Kusukiighhnaghtaa. / Allighas
\f1\b qwaaq
\f0\b0  ifkaghtuq, / Avaqutaghaq allighighaa. / Anigu qalghightuq. \'91Icicles form. / Fluffy snow falls. / Bedding for newborn seals. / Under foot ground snow barks.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  allighaq \'91mattress\'92, 
\f2\i so
\f0\i0  alligha
\f1\b sqwaaq
\f0\b0  
\f2\i is literally
\f0\i0 , \'91
\f1\b old
\f0\b0  mattress\'92 
\f2\i in this poem, refering to the down or feathers from the bedding)
\f0\i0  (SULUWET 9); = -lqwaaq, -rqwaaq													old N		pb PY-S v$03a3-				\'96sqwaaq	sqwaq	sqwxq	-\uc0\u1089 \u1179 \u1265 \u257 \u1179 \
?staaghhaa-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ?(ke)staaghhaa-													
\f0\b0 to lack the quality of V; to have the quality of N						?(ke)staaghhaa-	staghha	stxghhx	\
?staaghhaq*				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ?(ke)staaghhaq*													
\f0\b0 one that lacks the quality of N; one that has the quality of N						?(ke)staaghhaq*	staghhaq	stxghhaq	\
?staaq				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ?(ke)staaq													
\f0\b0 one that lacks the quality of N; one that has the quality of N						?(ke)staaq	staq	stxq	\
\'96staghhiinaq*	-cnf57yf2	only N		aghnastaghhiinaat \'91only women\'92, aghnastaghhiinaat iteghaatut \'91only women came in\'92; tagilghiit aghnastaghhiinaagut \'91the people who came were only women\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghnaq \'91woman\'92); tawatestaghhiinaq 'like that all the time' (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tawaten 'like that')	each one an N												only N; each one an N		< ?-ghhaq-(ng)inaq				\'96staghhiinaq*	staghhinaq	staghhxnaq	-\uc0\u1089 \u1090 \u1072 \u1203 \u1251 \u1085 \u1072 \u1179 \
-ste-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b +(te)ste-													
\f0\b0 to cause one to V; to allow one to V; to make one V; to let one V; to have one V						+(te)ste-	ste	ste	\
-stegpe-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b +(te)stegpe-													
\f0\b0 before one (other than subject of main verb) V-s						+(te)stegpe-	stegpe	stegpe	\
-stepag-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b +(te)stepag-													
\f0\b0 to cause or allow one to V too much						+(te)stepag-	stepag	stepag	\
-su-\super 2				
\f2\i \nosupersub see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96yu-\super 2													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to be good at V-ing; to generally V well							ysu2	ysu2	\
-su\super 1				
\f2\i \nosupersub see 
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96yu\super 1													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub one who is good at V-ing							su1	su1	\
-sug-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b +(te)sug-													
\f0\b0 to want one to V						+(te)sug-	sug	sug	\
-sug-	-/u-			
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yug-													
\f0\b0 to want to V; to want some N; to tend toward V-ing; to feel V (with emotional roots)		pb PE -yu!-					sug	sug	-\uc0\u1102 \u1075 -\
-suggaagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuggaagh-													
\f0\b0 to first V; to V in the beginning							suggagh	suggxgh	\
-suggaaq		first one to V		
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuggaaq													
\f0\b0 first one to V							suggaq	suggxq	\
+sugh-	-c/4-	test how V (it) is		pinighsughaa \'91he tested its quality\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pinigh- \'91to be good\'92); taketusughaa \'91he checked its length\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taketu- \'91to be how/so long\'92); matneghsughaa \'91he checked its heat or temperature\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  matnegh- \'91heat\'92); aqlaghasughaa \'91he checks how cold it is\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  aqlagha- \'91cold\'92)	check how V (it) is	how V (test or check ~ V (it) is)											to test how V (it) is; to check how V (it) is		pb PE -ci(C)u3-				+sugh-	sugh	sugh	-\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1271 -\
-sugnagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yugnagh													
\f0\b0 to be easy to V							sugnagh	sugnagh	\
+sugnite-	-c/uybns-	resemble N		yugsugnituq \'91it is like a person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person, man\'92); qikmighsugnituq \'91it is like a dog\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qikmiq \'91dog\'92); qavaghsugnituq \'91he seems to be sleeping\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); kinasugnituq \'91he seems like someone\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kina \'91who, someone\'92); nallukesugnituq \'91he is silly or slow-witted\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nalluke- \'91to not know\'92); Tawaten nagataqa nagaqugh
\f1\b sugnit
\f0\b0 aqa whaa nagatelqa sangwaa yuuk Qaaqamenguq atelek. \'91I have heard about \'96 well 
\f1\b it seems that
\f0\b0  I\'92ve heard about \'96 this certain man, the one I heard about, the one named Qaaqaq.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nagaqugh- \'91to hear\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:16); Aqsaqum natangani alamket, \'85 vegllug
\f1\b sugni
\f0\b0 t tamaakut, \'85 ughvughwaaghluki neghegkayuget.  \'91That part of the stomach, the \'93alamket\'94, \'85 which 
\f1\b has the texture of
\f0\b0  a towel, can be eaten after they wash it thoroughly.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  veglluk \'91towel\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:96)	like (be ~ N)	seem to be V-ing											to resemble N; to be like N; to seem to be V-ing		< -? -nite-\super 1\nosupersub ; pb PE nit- and cu!nit- and pa!nit-				+sugnite-	sugnite	sugnite	-\uc0\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 \u1085 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
-suguma-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuguma-													
\f0\b0 to be easy to V							suguma	suguma	\
-sukagh-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yukagh-													
\f0\b0 to be ready to V; to be about to V; to be all set to V; to make a move toward V-ing		pb PY yuka3-					sukagh	sukagh	\
-suke-\super 1				
\f2\i \nosupersub see 
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuke-\super 1													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to feel V toward; to V toward							suke1	suke1	\
-suke-\super 2				
\f2\i \nosupersub see 
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuke-\super 2													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to think that one is V-ing or has V-ed							suke2	suke2	\
-suneghtu-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuneghtu-													
\f0\b0 to love to V							suneghtu	suneghtu	\
-suqaq				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub \'96yuqaq													
\f0\b0 one who is good at V-ing; proficient V-er							suqaq	suqaq	\
-suwhaagh-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuwhaagh-													
\f0\b0 to first V; to V in the beginning							suwhagh	suwhxgh	\
-suwhaaq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~\sub f\nosupersub +yuwhaaq													
\f0\b0 first one to V							suwhaq	suwhxq	\
+ta	-nf	area (N ~ of possessor)		
\f2\i used with demonstrative adverb bases; shifts frame of reference; takes possessed endings; 
\f0\i0 awatangani (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  awatngani) \'91in the area on the other side of it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  awa(ni) \'91over there\'92); ukatangani (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  ukatngani) \'91this way toward here from it\'92) (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uka(ni) \'91this way, toward here\'92); Qaygeghlluni llaaghanam esghaamakangi mengteghalghun naaygham awa
\f1\b ta
\f0\b0 ngani. \'91 He got to the top  and, sure enough, he saw houses on the other side 
\f1\b of 
\f0\b0 the mountain.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  awa(ni) \'91over there, (on) the other side\'92) (AKIINGQWAGH. 8)									more examples needed				N area of possessor							ta	ta	-\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \
-ta				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b +(s)ta													
\f0\b0 habitual V-er; one who V-s as an occupation						+(s)ta	ta	ta	\
-ta				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~:(u)ta													
\f0\b0 device for V-ing; instrument for V-ing; condition with respect to V-ing (whether, how, when, where, etc. one V-s or has V-ed); one\'92s being V as a a cause of something						@~:(u)ta\super e	\nosupersub ta	ta	\

\f1\b +tagh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -nf4-\'a1	fetch N		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 meghtaghtuq \'91he fetched water\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92); vegtaghtuq \'91he gathered grass\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  vek \'91grass\'92); yugtaghtuq \'91he committed murder or manslaughter\'92 (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 , \'91gathered a person\'92; 
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person, man\'92)	gather N												to fetch N; to gather N		pb PE -ta3-					tagh1	tagh1	-\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -1\

\f1\b +tagh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -nf4-\'99	continuously (for N to ~ occur)		
\f2\i used with words denoting sounds; 
\f0\i0 suksugtaghtuq \'91there's a continuous or repeated hissing sound\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  suksuk \'91hissing sound\'92); kafsagtaghtuq \'91there is, or he\'92s making,  a continuous or repeated rustling sound\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kafsak \'91rustling sound\'92); sulugtaghtuq \'91the wind is howling\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  suluk \'91sound of wind\'92); suqsughtaghtuq \'91there is a continuous or repeated splashing sound\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  suqsuq \'91splashing sound\'92)	repeatedly (for N to ~ occur)												for N to continously occur; for N to repeatedly occur							tagh2	tagh2	-\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -2\

\f1\b +tagh-\super 3	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -nf4-\super \'a3	\nosupersub disposition (be V by ~)		
\f2\i at most marginally productive;
\f0\i0  alingtaghtuq \'91he's always afraid\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alinge- \'91to fear\'92); puygutaghtuq \'91he is forgetful\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  puygu- \'91to forget\'92); ighsanitaghtuq \'91he is lazy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighsani- \'91to refuse out of laziness\'92); amugtaghtuq \'91to have trouble seeing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  amug- \'91to be unable to see\'92); liigiketaghtuq \'91he\'92s quick-witted\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  liigike- \'91to understand\'92); ullghitaghtaghtuq \'91it keeps rolling\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ullghitagh- \'91to roll\'92); agitaghaaghaataghtuq \'91he keeps yawning\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  agitagha- \'91to yawn\'92 
\f2\i and unidentified intervening postbase
\f0\i0 ); 
\f2\i used with emotional roots:
\f0\i0   nangllegtaghtuq \'91he is a compassionate person\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  nanglleg- \'91feeling/inducing compassion\'92)	nature (be V by ~)	keep on V-ing											to be V by nature or disposition; to keep on V-ing							tagh3	tagh3	-\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1271 -3\
+tala	-nfkz	extent of V-ness		
\f2\i used with descriptive verbs;
\f0\i0  iglaghtutala \'91loudness (of voice)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iglaghtu- \'91to be loud\'92); uyatutala \'91distance\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uyatu- \'91to be distant\'92); angtala \'91size\'92, angtalanga \'91its size\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  ange- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  angli- \'91to grow\'92, aange- \'91to be big\'92); tagtala \'91length\'92, tagtalanga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tagtalnga \'91its length\'92; tagtalmi \'91later one\'92 
\f2\i (lexicalized) 
\f0\i0 (
\f2\i both irregularly (since with
\f0\i0  g 
\f2\i rather than 
\f0\i0 k
\f2\i ) from root
\f0\i0  take- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  taake- \'91to be long\'92); uglaghtala \'91number of things, quantity, amount\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uglagh- \'91to be many, much\'92); uksughtutala \'91age\'92, uksughtutalanganeng aaptaqa \'91I asked him about his age\'92, nallukaqa uksughtutalanga \'91I don\'92t know his age\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uksughtu- \'91to be old\'92); umututala \'91thickness\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umutu- \'91to be thick\'92); uqigtutala \'91weight\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uqigtu- \'91to be heavy\'92); akitutala \'91cost, price\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akitu- \'91to be expensive\'92); 
\f2\i variant is 
\f0\i0 +tala\super e													\nosupersub the extent of V-ness		pb PE -t0l0 and tal0					tala	tala	-\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1083 \u1103 \
-taq				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~:(u)taq													
\f0\b0 device for V-ing; instrument for V-ing						@~:(u)taq	taq	taq	\

\f1\b +taq\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -nf2	part (the N part of something)		tafsitaq \'91the belt part of something\'92, tafsitaa \'91its belt or belt-like part\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tafsi \'91belt\'92); yaqughtaq \'91the wing(like) part\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yaquq \'91wing\'92); uyghagtaq \'91the stone part\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uyghak \'91stone\'92); nanevgaghtaq \'91father\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized from
\f0\i0  nanevgaq \'91old man\'92); naangqughtaq \'91ivory piece on keel of boat\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized from
\f0\i0  naangquq \'91core of ivory\'92); napataq \'91pillar, especially a pillar-like mass of ice on ice field\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  napa \'91post\'92); neghqwaaghtaq \'91bone running the length of the keel of a skin boat\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized from
\f0\i0  neghqwaaq \'91bone\'92); usugtaq \'91tenon of skin boat frame member or sled frame member\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized from
\f0\i0  usuk \'91penis\'92); savigtaq \'91blade\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  savik \'91knife\'92); ggayegtaq \'91the part of a whale shoulder blade used as a lamp support\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ggayek \'91shoulder blade\'92); ighutaq \'91side pole of stretcher\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighu \'91leg\'92)													the N part of something		pb PE -ta3-					taq1	taq1	-\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b +taq\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -nf2	thing of N		Yupigtaq \'91(Yupik) Eskimo thing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Yupik \'91St. Lawrence Is./Siberian Eskimo\'92); Laluramkataq \'91thing of the Caucasian culture\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Laluramka \'91Caucasian\'92); kiiwhtaq \'91dolly varden
\f2\i  (Salvelinus malma)\'92 
\f0\i0 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiikw \'91river\'92); qavngaghtaq \'91thing of the past\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavngaq \'91when (in the past), at some time in the past\'92); quyillegtaq \'91knee-high skin boot\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized, from
\f0\i0  Quyillek \'91Chukchi\'92); ; uyavaghtaq \'91something from far away\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uyavaq \'91distance, far away\'92); ayumightaq \'91thing of long ago\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayumiq \'91long ago\'92); kiigtaq \'91thing of last summer\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiik \'91summer\'92)													thing of N		pb PE -ta3-					taq2	taq2	-\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b +taq\super 3	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -nf2	acquired N		aghveghtaa \'91the whale he caught\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghveq \'91whale\'92); qawaagtanka \'91the birds I caught\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qawaak \'91bird\'92)	caught N												acquired N; caught		< -te\super 2\nosupersub -(g)aq					taq3	taq3	-\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \

\f1\b +taq\super 4	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -nf2\super \'a2	\nosupersub disposition (one who is V by nature or ~)		
\f2\i used with emotional roots; 
\f0\i0 kayngutaq \'91bashful person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  
\f2\i emotional
\f0\i0  
\f2\i root
\f0\i0  kayngu- \'91shame, bashfulness\'92); nangllegtaq \'91compassionate person\'92 (
\f2\i from emotional root 
\f0\i0 nanglleg- \'91feeling/inducing compassion\'92)	nature (one who is V by ~ or disposition)	one who is V by nature or dispostion											one who is V by nature or disposition							taq4	taq4	-\uc0\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 4\
-te-	-\'f8e\uc0\u960 ns-			
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(u)te-													
\f0\b0 to V for; to V with; to V each other; 
\f2\i half-transitive or detransitivizing postbase for certain bases						
\f0\i0 @~:(u)te-	te	te	-(\uc0\u1091 )\u1090 \u1099 -\

\f1\b +te-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -ns-\'a1	act on so as to cause to V		
\f2\i non-productive but occurs with many bases; it is not entirely predictable which bases will need these postbases to form transitives; 
\f0\i0 tuqutaa \'91he killed it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqu- \'91to die\'92); naangtaa \'91he used it up\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naange- \'91to be consumed\'92); ifkaghtaa \'91he dropped it or otherwise made it fall\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ifkagh- \'91to fall\'92); kagimtaa \'91he crumbled it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kagime- \'91to crumble\'92); pugleghtaa \'91he brought it to the surface\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  puglegh- \'91to come to the surface\'92); makregtaa \'91he peeled it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  makreg- \'91to peel\'92 (intransitive)); aantaa \'91he put it out(side)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out(side)\'92); qelpeghtaa \'91he opened it\'92 (
\f2\i from 
\f0\i0 qelpegh- \'91to open\'92); 
\f2\i may be used \'96 at least to a limited extent \'96 after the postbase
\f0\i0  -yug- 
\f2\i (q.v.)
\f0\i0 : mighuyugtaatnga \'91they caused me to find it unappetizing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mighuyug- \'91to find something unappetizing\'92); qinuyugtaa \'91he pestered her\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qinuyug- \'91to feel irritated from being pestered\'92); Vegaaghem sungaghyug
\f1\b t
\f0\b0 aqaa nuna. \'91The grass is 
\f1\b making
\f0\b0  the land greenish in color.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sugaghyug- \'91to be bluish or greenish in color\'92) (SULUWET 10)	cause to V												to act on so as to cause to V		pb PE -t-1					te1	te1	-\uc0\u1090 \u1099 -1\

\f1\b +te-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -ns-\'99	go to N		
\f2\i used only on nouns for certain categories of things, namely places, game animals, supplies, periods of time; 
\f0\i0 Sivuqaghtuq \'91he went to Gambell\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Sivuqaq \'91Gambell\'92); kiiwhtuq \'91he went to the river\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiikw \'91river\'92); qiighqaghtuq \'91he went to the island\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiighqaq \'91island\'92); nanughtuq \'91he caught a polar bear\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nanuq \'91polar bear\'92); qawaagtuq \'91he caught birds\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qawaak \'91bird\'92); quugtuq \'91he obtained firewood\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  quuk \'91firewood\'92); uksughtuq \'91he sent the winter\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uksuq \'91winter\'92); aghneghtuq \'91spent the day\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghneq \'91day\'92); neqetuq \'91he caught fish or game, obtained food\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqa\super e\nosupersub  \'91food\'92)	catch N (game)	obtain N								spend N (time)			to go to N; to catch N; to obtain N; to spend N (time)		pb PE -t-2					te2	te2	-\uc0\u1090 \u1099 -2\

\f1\b +te-\super 3	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -ns-\super \'a3	\nosupersub have V or N		
\f2\i non-productive; occurs with nouns, verbs or roots denoting qualities or properties of a thing; 
\f0\i0 kavituq \'91it is red\'92, kavilnguq \'91the red one\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 kaviq \'91redness\'92); sukatuq \'91it is fast\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  suka \'91speed\'92); papraangituq \'91he is vigorous\'92 (
\f2\i from 
\f0\i0 papraangi \'91vigor\'92); uuynituq \'91he has body odor\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  uuyni \'91body odor\'92); aghipatuq \'91it is wet, raw\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghipa \'91wetness\'92); kumlatuq \'91it is freezing\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 kumla \'91coldness\'92); aqlaghatuq \'91it is cold\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  aqlagha \'91cold (in air)\'92); muugatuq \'91it is sweet\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  muuga \'91sweetness\'92)													to have V or N		pb PE t0-					te3	te3	-\uc0\u1090 \u1099 -3\

\f1\b +te-\super 4	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -ns-\super 4	\nosupersub get into a V position		
\f2\i used with postural roots; 
\f0\i0 ingaghtuq \'91he lay down\'92, ingaghtaa \'91he lay it down\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  inghagh- \'91lying down\'92); iggagtuq \'91it tilted\'92, iggagtaa \'91he tilted it\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  iggag- \'91tilting\'92); sivugtuq \'91he raised his (own) head\'92, sivugtaa \'91he raised his (another\'92s) head\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 sivug- \'91head tilted up\'92)	put into a V position	position (get or put into a V ~)											to get into a V position; to put into a V position							te4	te4	-\uc0\u1090 \u1099 -\u1271 \
+(te)sigate-	-\'f8ns\uc0\u960 cbufns-	prevent one from V-ing		
\f2\i this is a \'93compound verbal\'94 postbase; 
\f0\i0 aanesigataa \'91he didn\'92t let him go out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92); Ilanga tepesluku, iingunaan tepes
\f1\b igata
\f0\b0 at. \'91Pulling part of them onto the beach, they 
\f1\b did not allow 
\f0\b0 all come to the beach [at one time].\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tepe- \'91to come to the shore\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGHAGH. 3:134); te 
\f2\i is used with bases that ending a consonant; 
\f0\i0  iteghtesigataa \'91he didn\'92t let him come in\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to come in\'92); Repall atangan qavagh
\f1\b tesigal
\f0\b0 kanga saama neghe
\f1\b sigal
\f0\b0 kanga. \'91His father didn\'92t let him sleep and didn\'92t let him eat.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92, and negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92) (UNGIPAGHAGH. 67)	keep one from V-ing	allow (not ~ one to V)								let (not ~ one V)			to prevent or keep one from V-ing; to not allow one to V; to not let one V		< -(te)ste-igate-				+(te)sigate-	tesigate	tesigate	-(\uc0\u1090 \u1099 )\u1089 \u1080 \u1075 \u1072 \u1090 \u1099 -\
+(te)snaanghite-	-\'f8ns\uc0\u960 cy]6y4bns-	tell one not to V in the future		
\f2\i this is a \'93ompound verbal\'94 postbase; 
\f0\i0 Nunalgutemnun qagavek talwa kinkunun iteghte
\f1\b snaanghit
\f0\b0 amken, \'85 \'91I will 
\f1\b not allow 
\f0\b0 you to take up residence with anyone in town, \'85\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iteghte- \'91to go (move) in (with)\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:246)	forbid one from V-ing in the future								what is the difference between this and -(te)snanigh-?				to tell one not to V in the future; to forbid one from V-ing in the future		< -(te)ste-naanghite-				+(te)snaanghite-	tesnanghite-	tesnxnghite-	-(\uc0\u1090 \u1099 )\u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u257 \u1085 \u1271 \u1080 \u1090 \u1099 -\
+(te)snanigh-	-\'f8ns\uc0\u960 cy]6yb4-	tell not to V		
\f2\i this is a \'93compound verbal\'94 postbase; 
\f0\i0 tugusnanighaa \'91he told someone not to take it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tugu- \'91to take\'92); neghesnanighaa \'91he told her not to eat; he told someone not to eat it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); ingaghtesnanighaa \'91he told her not to lie down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); qavaghtesnanighaa \'91he told her not to sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92)	forbid one to V												to tell not to V; to forbid one to V		< (te)ste-nanigh-				+(te)snanigh-	tesnanigh	tesnanigh	-(\uc0\u1090 \u1099 )\u1089 \u1085 \u1100 \u257 \u1085 \u1080 \u1271 -\
+(te)ste-	-\'f8ns\uc0\u960 cns-	cause one to V		
\f2\i this is a \'93compound verbal\'94 postbase; 
\f0\i0 qiyastaa \'91it made him cry\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); taaqestaa \'91he made her quit\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taaqe- \'91to quit\'92); ingaghtestaa \'91she made him lie down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); te 
\f2\i is used with bases ending in a consonant:
\f0\i0  qavaghtestaa \'91she let him sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); iyataghtestaa \'91it made him hungry\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iyatagh- \'91to be hungry\'92); aghnam taghnughhaghmun iqalluk neghestaa \'91the woman had the child eat the fish\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neghe- \'91to eat\'92)	let one V	make one V								have one V			to cause one to V; to allow one to V; to make one V; to let one V; to have one V		pb PE -tit-				+(te)ste-	teste	teste	-(\uc0\u1090 \u1099 )\u1089 \u1090 \u1099 -\
+(te)stegpe-	-\'f8ns\uc0\u960 cns[gs-	before one (other than subject of main verb) V-s		
\f2\i this combination of the postbases
\f0\i0  -(te)ste- \'91to let\'92, -gpe- \'91without\'92, 
\f2\i and the transitive subordinative marked by 
\f0\i0 -na-, 
\f2\i may be used in place of the precessive mood when the subject of the
\f0\i0  'before' 
\f2\i clause is different from the subject of the main clause and especially (though not exclusively) when the situation is such that the literal meaning, 
\f0\i0 'without letting one V' 
\f2\i is not a possible interpretation; this is apparently the one situation in this language in which the compound-verbal postbase 
\f0\i0 +(te)ste- 
\f2\i is used in a purely formal sense in order to satisfy the constraint on the subordinative that its subject be the same as that of the main verb (though this is a common use of cognates of this postbase in other Eskimo languages); 
\f0\i0 aanunga aghtestegpenaan \'91I went out before day broke\'92 (
\f2\i literally
\f0\i0 : \'91I went out without letting day break\'92 (
\f2\i compare the construction with the precessive:
\f0\i0  aanunga aghpagilgan 
\f2\i which has the same meaning) (from
\f0\i0  aghte- \'91for day to break\'92); aanunga neghestegpenaki \'91I went out without letting them eat\'92 
\f2\i (which is the literal meaning) or, 
\f0\i0 \'91I went out before they ate\'92 
\f2\i (which is an alternative to the construction with the precessive mood,
\f0\i0  aanunga neghvagilgata 
\f2\i which also means
\f0\i0  \'91I went out before they ate\'92)													before one (other than subject of main verb) V-s		< -(te)ste-ghpe-				+(te)stegpe-	testegpe	testegpe	-(\uc0\u1090 \u1099 )\u1089 \u1090 \u1099 \u1093 \u1087 \u1099 -\
+(te)stepag-	-\'f8ns\uc0\u960 cnsgfu-	cause one to V too much		
\f2\i this is a \'93compound verbal\'94 postbase	
\f0\i0 allow one to V too much								examples needed				to cause or allow one to V too much		< -(te)ste-pag-				+(te)stepag-	testepag	testepag	-(\uc0\u1090 \u1099 )\u1089 \u1090 \u1099 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
+(te)sug-	-\'f8ns\uc0\u960 c/u-	want one to V		
\f2\i a compound-verbal postbase; 
\f0\i0 aanesugaa \'91he wants her to go out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92); qavaghtesugaa \'91he wants her to sleep\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92)													to want one to V				< -(te)ste-yug-		+(te)sug-	tesug	tesug	-(\uc0\u1090 \u1099 )\u1089 \u1102 \u1075 -\
?tghute-	-n5ens-	miss the mark by shooting too much toward N		
\f2\i used on demonstrative adverb and positional bases; 
\f0\i0 ukatghutuq \'91his shot fell short\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uka(ni) \'91this side\'92); qayetghutaa \'91he did more toward it than needed\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaya\super e\nosupersub  \'91surface\'92); awatghutuq \'91he overshot\'92, awatghutaa \'91he overshot it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  awa(ni) \'91over there\'92); 
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  qaasghutaa \'91he overshot it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaya\super e\nosupersub  \'91top surface\'92)	miss out on V-ing												to miss the mark by shooting too much toward N; to miss out on V-ing		pb PE -t3ut0-					tghute	tghute	-\uc0\u1090 \u1203 \u1091 \u1090 \u1099 -\
+ti-	-nb-	speak the language of N		Laluramkatiiq \'91he's speaking English (or possibly another language of Caucasians)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Laluramka \'91Caucasian\'92); Ayuqlightiiq \'91he's speaking mainland Eskimo (Inupiaq or Central Yup'ik)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Ayuqliq \'91Alaskan Eskimo\'92); Quyillegtiiq \'91he's speaking Chukchi\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Quyillek \'91Chukchi\'92); 
\f2\i generally used only with languages other than Yupik, though some people do say,
\f0\i0  Yupigtiiq \'91he's speaking (Yupik) Eskimo\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  Yupik \'91St. Lawrence Is./Chukotkan Eskimo\'92)													to speak the language of N							ti	ti	-\uc0\u1090 \u1080 -\
-tke-	-\'f8e\uc0\u960 nrs-			
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(u)tke-													
\f0\b0 to V over or on account of						@~:(u)tke-	tke	tke	-(\uc0\u1091 )\u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
+tmiighte-	-nv]75ns-	go in the N direction		
\f2\i used with some demonstrative adverb bases and with positionals; 
\f0\i0 sanitmiightuq \'91he\'92s going to the side\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sani \'91area to side\'92); awatmiightuq \'91he\'92s going away\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  awa(ni) \'91over there\'92); ketmiightuq \'91it\'92s going down river or out to sea\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  keta\super e\nosupersub  \'91area toward out to sea\'92 -- 
\f2\i note
\f0\i0  ketmiighte- 
\f2\i and not 
\f0\i0 *ketetmiighte-); kiwatmiightuq \'91he\'92s going to the west or to the back\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiwa(ni) \'91in area in the west or in back\'92); ilutmiightuq \'91he\'92s going inwards\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ilu \'91inside, interior\'92)													to go in the N direction		pb PY tmi(C)a3t0- and tmu3t0-					tmighte	tmxghte	-\uc0\u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1251 \u1203 \u1090 \u1099 -\
+tmun	-nv]ey	toward N		
\f2\i used on positional bases and some demonstrative adverb bases; yields particles; 
\f0\i0 asitmun \'91downward\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  asi \'91area below\'92); natmun \'91toward where?\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  na(ni) \'91where\'92); awatmun \'91toward over there\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  awa(ni) \'91over there\'92); ketmun \'91toward the water\'92 (
\f2\i irregularly, from
\f0\i0  keta\super e\nosupersub  \'91area toward water\'92)													N-ward; toward N							tmun	tmun	-\uc0\u1090 \u1084 \u1100 \u1091 \u1085 \
\'b1tu-	-ne-	have a lot of N		
\f2\i takes the forms 
\f0\i0 +tu-, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  -tu-; 
\f2\i generally the first form is used with verbs, the second with nouns and with dimensional roots; 
\f0\i0 nuyaghtuuq \'91he has a lot of hair\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuyaq \'91hair\'92); imaghtuuq \'91it is full\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  imaq \'91contents\'92); ukazightuuq \'91it has a lot of rabbits\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ukaziq \'91rabbit\'92); ighlegtuuq \'91he is always stingy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighleg- \'91to be stingy\'92; 
\f2\i note, not
\f0\i0  *ighletuuq); saqfituuq \'91he is splay-footed\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  saqfigh- \'91to point toes out\'92); qavatuuq \'91he is always sleepy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavagh- \'91to sleep\'92); ameltuuq \'91it is broad\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  amel- \'91breadth\'92); iqetuuq \'91it is wide\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  iqe- \'91width\'92)	lot (have a ~ of N)	habitually V											to have a lot of N; to V habitually		pb PE -tu-					tu	tu	-\uc0\u1090 \u1091 -\

\f1\b +tugh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -ne4-\'a1	eat N		ayveghtughtuq \'91he ate walrus\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayveq \'91walrus\'92); Taawa mangtag
\f1\b tu
\f0\b0 utaqukut tesamani. \'91We would 
\f1\b eat
\f0\b0  muktuk down there [at the beach].\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mangtak \'91muktuk\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:148); 
\f2\i also probably,
\f0\i0  qavangughtughtuq \'91he had a dream\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavanguq \'91dream\'92)													to eat N		pb PE -tu3-1					tugh1	tugh1	-\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -1\

\f1\b +tugh-\super 2	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -ne4-\'99	keep on V-ing		avegtughaa \'91he diced it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aveg- \'91to divide in two\'92); iigtughaa \'91he dug it up\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iigge- \'91to dig\'92); keligtughaa \'91he scraped away at it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kelig- \'91to scrape\'92); pilagtughaa \'91he repeatedly cut it, he sawed it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  pilag- \'91to cut\'92)	repeat (V by ~ed actions)												to keep on V-ing; to V by repeated actions		pb PE -tu3-2					tugh2	tugh2	-\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1271 -2\
+tulli-	-nek]b-	feasible (for it to be getting ~ to use N or to go V-ing)		angyaghtulliiq \'91it is getting feasible to hunt by boat, the weather is improving\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyagh- \'91to go out hunting in a boat\'92)													for it to be getting feasible to use N or to go V-ing							tulli	tulli	-\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1083 \u1100 \u1080 -\
+tupag-	-negfu-	eat too much N		tawaqatupagtuq \'91he smoked or chewed too much tobacco\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tawaqa \'91tobacco\'92); Quyngiit tuqughllagumalghii, entaqunnguq taakwani qavaghtalleghmi taghyugh
\f1\b tupag
\f0\b0 llagem. \'91Their reindeer all died off maybe on account of 
\f1\b getting
\f0\b0  too much salt by overnighting down there [on the sea ice].\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  taghyuq \'91salt\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:6)	use too much N												to eat or use too much N		< -tugh\super 1\nosupersub -pag-          					tupag	tupag	-\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1087 \u1072 \u1075 -\
\'b1tuqaq	-ne2f2	lots (one that has ~ of N)		
\f2\i examples:
\f0\i0  nuyaghtuqaq \'91hairy one; one with long hair\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nuyaq \'91hair\'92); ighlegtuqaq \'91person who is always stingy\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighleg- \'91to be stingy\'92); saqfituqaq \'91person who is splay-footed\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  saqfigh- \'91to point toes out\'92); akituqaq \'91expensive thing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aki \'91price\'92); qagughtuqaq \'91one with a high forehead\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qaguq \'91forehead\'92); qiingutuqaq \'91bearded animal (reindeer)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiingu \'91reindeer beard\'92); mulutuqaq \'91slow thing or person\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mulu- \'91to tarry\'92); temketuqaq \'91hummocky ground\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  temka\super e\nosupersub  \'91hummock, tussock\'92); ameltuqaq \'91wide, broad or stout thing\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 amel- \'91wide\'92)	habitual V-er												one that has lots of N; one that V-s habitually		< -tu-qaq					tuqaq	tuqaq	-\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1179 \u1072 \u1179 \
+tutka-	-nenrf-	be V to an indicated degree		
\f2\i used with descriptive verbs; 
\f0\i0 umututkaaq \'91it is that thick\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  umu- \'91to be thick\'92); usqaghtutkaaq \'91it is that high\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  usqagh- \'91to be high\'92); angtutkaaq \'91it is that big\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  ange- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  angli- \'91to grow\'92, aange- \'91to be big\'92); tagtutkaaq \'91it is that long\'92 (
\f2\i irregularly from
\f0\i0  
\f2\i root
\f0\i0  take- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  taake- \'91to be long\'92); tagneghtutkaluni \'91(it)  being that dark\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tagneq \'91darkness\'92); uniistaaghtutkaaq \'91it is that soft\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uniistaaq \'91soft thing\'92)	have N to an indicated degree												to be V or have N to an indicated degree		< -tu-?-					tutka	tutka	-\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 -\
+tutkaligh-	-nenrfkb4-	measure the approximate V of (it)		
\f2\i postbase
\f0\i0  +tutkaligh-; 
\f2\i examples:
\f0\i0  Saagtengan tagtalngi, tenpeyaghqaagpenaki sangwaa six-feet entaqun five-feet tawaten uya
\f1\b tutkaligh
\f0\b0 aqaput. \'91We kept the harness line 
\f1\b an approximate 
\f0\b0 length five or six feet, so that it won\'92t run into them [the reindeer].\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  uya- \'91distance\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:90)													to measure the approximate the V of (it)							tutkaligh	tutkaligh	-\uc0\u1090 \u1091 \u1090 \u1082 \u1072 \u1083 \u1080 \u1271 -\
+tuumagh-	-n8vf4-	together with one's N(s)		
\f2\i used in the quantifier/qualifier construction; 
\f0\i0 ighneghtuumaghmi \'91with his son\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighneq \'91son\'92); unugtuumaan \'91(during) the night as well\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  unuk \'91night\'92); aghneghtuumaan \'91day and night\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghneq \'91day\'92); Quyngigh
\f1\b tuumagh
\f0\b0 menguq anguyangluteng anagumalghiit qavaghnanighnaqngameng Aasameng. \'91
\f1\b Together with
\f0\b0  their reindeer, it is said, they fled from Aasa when they couldn\'92t get any sleep after getting enemies [who gave them no rest].\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  quyngiq \'91reindeer\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:2)	with one\'92s N(s)												together with one's N(s)							tumagh	txmagh	-\uc0\u1090 \u1263 \u1084 \u1072 \u1271 -\
-tuute-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~+(q/t)uute-													
\f0\b0 to V as a group; to V together						~+(q/t)uute-	tute	txte	\
-u-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~:(ng)u-													
\f0\b0 to be N; is N; for there to be N (weather condition); to be V-ing; to be V-habitually or as an occupation; while in the process of V-ing						~:(ng)u-	u	u	\
@~:(u)n	-\'f8e\uc0\u960 y	device for V-ing		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 kingin \'91youngest child\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kingi- \'91to act babyishly (as of a child whose mother is expecting\'92); u 
\f2\i is used with all bases except those ending in a full vowel: 
\f0\i0 guutun \'91weapon\'92, guututnga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  guututanga \'91his weapon\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  guute- \'91to shoot\'92); meghun \'91dipper\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  megh- \'91to drink\'92); yaavuquun \'91oar\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yaavuqugh- \'91to continue to row\'92); iviighun \'91whaling song\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iviigh- \'91to hold a certain whaling ceremony\'92); ighlleghun \'91harpoon head\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighllegh- \'91to thrust\'92); iinqun \'91pet name for a child\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iinqe- \'91to coo a child using a pet name\'92); kagsagun \'91dog whip\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kagsagte- \'91to whip\'92); kasugun \'91club\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kasug- \'91to beat\'92); ilagaan \'91hymn, shaman\'92s song\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ilagagh- \'91to sing\'92 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *ilag\ul a\ulnone gh\ul u\ulnone n); ipegsaan \'91whetstone\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ipegsagh- \'91to whet\'92); (keviin \'91insulation (usually made of grass)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kevigh- \'91to stuff, to insulate\'92 
\f2\i via
\f0\i0  *kev\ul i\ulnone gh\ul u\ulnone n); neqnighsaan \'91spice, seasoning\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  neqnighsagh- \'91to make tasty\'92); natiin \'91heavy sinew thread for sewing on soles\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  natigh- \'91to provide with a sole\'92); naghpiin \'91lasso\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naghpigh- \'91to lasso\'92); 
\f2\i note the following expressions of repeated occurence of an event: 
\f0\i0 ighivgaatanga tamaghhaan \'91every evening\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ighivgaq \'91yesterday\'92); aghhutanga tamaghhaan \'91every day\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aghte- \'91to become day\'92); = -(u)ta\super e\nosupersub , -(u)taq	instrument for V-ing												device for V-ing; instrument for V-ing		pb PE un (ut0-)				@~:(u)n	un	un	-(\uc0\u1091 )\u1085 \
@~:(u)saq	-\'f8e\uc0\u960 cz2	something that has been V-ed		
\f2\i used with verbs of giving; 
\f0\i0 tuyuusaq \'91something sent\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuyugh- \'91to send\'92); tunusaq \'91a gift to give\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  
\f2\i root
\f0\i0  tune- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  tuune- \'91to give\'92); akequsaq \'91something promised\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  akeqe- \'91to promise\'92)	been (something that has been V-ed)												something that has been V-ed						@~:(u)saq	usaq	usaq	-(\uc0\u1091 )\u1089 \u1103 \u1179 \
@~:(u)siq	-\'f8e\uc0\u960 cb2	device for V-ing		tugusiq \'91device for taking or picking up things\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tugu- \'91to take\'92); neghusiq \'91eating utensil\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  negh<e>- \'91to eat\'92); aatusiq \'91device to help one get dressed\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aate- \'91to get dressed\'92); igaasiq \'91writing device, pencil, pen\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  igagh- \'91to write\'92); gaaghusiq \'91device for cooking, pot\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  gaagh- \'91to cook\'92); aallgusiq \'91sweeping device, broom\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alleg- \'91to sweep\'92); navghaasiq \'91loan, something pawned or otherwise loaned out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  navghagh- \'91to borrow\'92)	instrument for V-ing												device for V-ing; instrument for V-ing		pb PE -uci3				@~:(u)siq	usiq	usiq	-(\uc0\u1091 )\u1089 \u1080 \u1179 \
@~:(u)ta	-\'f8e\uc0\u960 nf	device for V-ing		
\f2\i non-productive except with the meaning 
\f0\i0  \'91condition with respect to V-ing\'92 
\f2\i (see further below); 
\f0\i0 meghuta \'91dipper, cup\'92, meghutanga \'91his dipper\'92, meghutka \'91my dipper\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  megh- \'91to drink\'92); tegguta \'91splint\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tegge- \'91to be hard\'92); ungipaghaata \'91traditional story\'92; Ungazighmiit ungipaghaatangit \'91the stories of the Chaplino people\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ungipaghagh- \'91to tell a story\'92); gguta \'91tooth\'92, ggutet \'91teeth\'92; ggutanga 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  guutnga \'91his tooth\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  egge- \'91to crimp with teeth\'92); 
\f2\i examples of usage
\f0\i0  \'91condition with respect to V-ing\'92 
\f2\i (note that this can involve a special use of the absolutive case)
\f0\i0 : aaptaanga aghnam neghumatanga (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neghumatangameng) \'91he asked me whether the woman ate\'92, aaptaanga qavngaq aghnam neghumatanga (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neghumatangameng) \'91he asked me when the woman ate\'92, aaptaanga aghnamun neghumatanga (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neghumatangameng) iqalluk \'91he asked me whether the woman ate the fish\'92, aaptaanga neghumaten (
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  neghumategpeneng) \'91he asked me whether you ate\'92 (
\f2\i all from
\f0\i0  neghuma- \'91to have eaten\'92); Qugagsighaq akuutaq, neqekrangllaghyaghqaq Paapgem taawanginaq nallukegkanga sangu
\f1\b ta
\f0\b0 nga. \'91Papek didn\'92t know the sour mixture, the bread dough, what it 
\f1\b was
\f0\b0 .\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sangu- \'91to be what?\'92) (IGHSANITALGHII AFSENGAQ :9); 
\f2\i Examples of usage
\f0\i0  \'91one\'92s being V as a cause of something\'92: iknaqutmeggneng \'91since they were strong, from their being strong\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iknaqe- \'91to be strong\'92); Quyngiqlu taana naangkaayalghii, tuqughllakaayalghii Qiighqaq una ungagiigh
\f1\b ut
\f0\b0 em angtalnganeng. \'91And the reindeer came to an end, died off, on account of this island 
\f1\b being
\f0\b0  depleted of its reindeer moss to a large extent.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ungagiigh- \'91to be come to lack reindeer moss\'92) (SIVUQ. UNGIPAM. 20); Tawaten ayuq
\f1\b ut
\f0\b0 mineng Atayaghhaq upenghaatanga tamaghhaan tespamavek aliganneghtuftuq elngaatall. \'91From his 
\f1\b being
\f0\b0  that way Atayaghhaq every spring liked very much to go there.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayuqe- \'91to be a certain way\'92) (PANGEGH. 18); = -(u)n, -(u)taq	instrument for V-ing	condition with respect to V-ing (whether, how, when, where, etc. one V-s or has V-ed)								cause (one\'92s being V as a ~ of something)			device for V-ing; instrument for V-ing; condition with respect to V-ing (whether, how, when, where, etc. one V-s or has V-ed); one\'92s being V as a a cause of something		pb PE un (ut0)				@~:(u)ta\super e	\nosupersub uta	uta	-(\uc0\u1091 )\u1090 \u1072 \
@~:(u)taq	-\'f8e\uc0\u960 nf2	device for V-ing		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 angyaataq \'91food for use while hunting with a boat\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized from
\f0\i0  angyagh- \'91to hunt by boat\'92); napaataq \'91pole and flag for signaling during a hunt\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  napagh- \'91to erect\'92); qavraataq \'91ladle, stirring spoon\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qavragh- \'91to mix\'92); meghataq \'91soda pop, soft drink\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  megh- \'91to drink\'92); ayagutaq \'91device for pushing a boat away from the ice or for pushing ice away from a boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ayag- \'91to push off\'92); = -(u)n, -(u)ta\super e	\nosupersub instrument for V-ing												device for V-ing; instrument for V-ing						@~:(u)taq	utaq	utaq	-(\uc0\u1091 )\u1090 \u1072 \u1179 \
@~:(u)te-	-\'f8e\uc0\u960 ns-	for (V ~)		inghutaa \'91he picked berries for her\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  inghu- \'91to pick berries\'92); repangutaa \'91he bought (or otherwise obtained) a hammer for him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  repange- \'91to acquire a hammer\'92); kuuvutaa \'91he spilled it along with others\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kuuve- \'91to spill\'92); aanutaa \'91he took it out with him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aane- \'91to go out\'92); kaatutaa \'91he arrived with it, brought it with him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaate- \'91to arrive\'92); mayuutaa \'91he took it up\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mayugh- \'91to go up\'92); ukigutaa \'91he took it down\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ukig- \'91to go down\'92); ingaghtutaa \'91he lay down with him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ingaghte- \'91to lie down\'92); kaagutaa \'91he hit with it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaaw- \'91to hit\'92); iitghutaa \'91he brought it in\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegh- \'91to go in\'92); tughumaghatuk \'91they\sub 2\nosupersub  are wrestling with each other\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tughumagha- \'91to wrestle\'92); 
\f2\i serves as the detransitivizing or "half-transitive" postbase for certain bases, in place
\f0\i0  of -i-\super 1\nosupersub  
\f2\i (q.v.): 
\f0\i0 naalkutuq \'91he found something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naalke- \'91to find\'92); tugutuq \'91he took something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tugu- \'91to take\'92); aqfatuq \'91he fetched something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aqfa- \'91to fetch\'92); ipugutuq \'91he scooped up something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ipug- \'91to scoop up\'92); kayusiituq \'91he helped out\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kayusigh- \'91to help\'92); 
\f2\i note that
\f0\i0  
\f2\i with bases that ends in 
\f0\i0 gte-,
\f2\i  the 
\f0\i0 te is 
\f2\i dropped when this postbase is used
\f0\i0 : makregutuq \'91he peeled something\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  makregte- \'91to peel\'92 (
\f2\i transitive
\f0\i0 )); maligutuq \'91he accompanied someone\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  maligte- \'91to accompany\'92) 
\f2\i (contrast the situation with bases that end in vowel 
\f0\i0 te
\f2\i , for example 
\f0\i0 kaate-
\f2\i  above, or 
\f0\i0 ghte-, 
\f2\i for example
\f0\i0  ingaghte- 
\f2\i above  \'96 though the pattern is not entirely clear
\f0\i0 )	with (V together ~)	each other (V ~)								
\f2\i half-transitive postbase			
\f0\i0 to V for; to V together with; to V each other; 
\f2\i half-transitive or detransitivizing postbase for certain bases		
\f0\i0 pb PE -ut0-				@~:(u)te-	ute	ute	-(\uc0\u1091 )\u1090 \u1099 -\
@~:(u)tke-	-\'f8e\uc0\u960 nrs-	over (V ~ or on account of)		qeneghtutkaa 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qenghutkaa \'91he feels slighted over it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qeneghte- \'91to feel slighted\'92); nenglaatkaa \'91he's laughing over it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  nenglagh- \'91to laugh\'92); qiyatkaa \'91he is crying on account of it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92); alingutkaa \'91he\'92s worried about him\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alinge- \'91to be afraid\'92); amyuutkaa \'91he\'92s being cruel over it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  amyugh- \'91to be cruel\'92)	on account of (V over or ~)												to V over or on account of		< -(u)n-ke-				@~:(u)tke-	utke	utke	-(\uc0\u1091 )\u1090 \u1082 \u1099 -\
?ugh-	-e4-	completely V		
\f2\i probably non-productive; 
\f0\i0 aavgughaa \'91he cut it up completely\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aveg- \'91to divide\'92); angaghqughaa \'91he transported all of it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angaghqe- \'91to convey\'92); ikughaa \'91he cut it all up\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  ike- 
\f2\i as in 
\f0\i0 iike- \'91to remove a piece\'92); kumaghughtuq \'91it (the flame) has grown\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kumagh- \'91to be lit\'92)													to V completely		pb PE -(C)u3-					ugh	ugh	-\uc0\u1091 \u1271 -\
:ughagh-	-e4f4-	thoroughness (V with ~ or force)		
\f2\i probably non-productive; 
\f0\i0 alingughaghtuq \'91he winced\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  alinge- \'91to be afraid\'92); avuughaghaa \'91he divided it quickly\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  avugh- \'91to sort\'92); sapughaghii \'91he repeatedly covered them (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  sape- 
\f2\i as in 
\f0\i0 saape- \'91to cover\'92)	force (V with thoroughness or ~)												to V with thoroughness or force							ughagh	ughagh	-\uc0\u1091 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
?ughqe-	-e52s-	become N		
\f2\i at most marginally productive; 
\f0\i0 ipapiighquq \'91it came to pass\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ipapik \'91truth, reality\'92); kanuughqaa \'91he accidently got blood on it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kanuk \'91blood spot\'92); kumlaaghquq \'91it got frozen\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  kumla- \'91coldness\'92); iqaaghquq \'91he got dirty\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iqa \'91dirt\'92); puyuughquq \'91it got sooty\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  puyuq \'91soot\'92)	get N on (self or other)												to become N; to get N on (self or other)		< -(ng)ughte-ghqe-              					ughqe	ughqe	-\uc0\u1091 \u1203 \u1179 \u1099 -\
-ughte-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~:(ng)ughte-													
\f0\b0 to become N; for there to start to be N (weather condition)						~:(ng)ughte-	ughte	ughte	\
-uma-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~:(i/u)ma-													
\f0\b0 to have V-ed or been V-ed; to be in a state of having V-ed or been V-ed; with participial mood: to evidently have V-ed or been V-ed						@~:(i/u)ma-	uma	uma	\
-umafte-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(i/u)mafte-													
\f0\b0 how much subject evidently has V-ed!						@~:(i/u)mafte-	umafte-	umafte-	\
-umagh-				
\f2\i see at 
\f1\i0\b @~:(i/u)magh-													
\f0\b0 while V-ing						@~:(i/u)magh-	umagh	umagh	\
-uman				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b @~:(i/u)man													
\f0\b0 the time while V-ing; the course of V-ing						@~:(i/u)man	uman	uman	\
-umanginagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(i/u)manginagh-													
\f0\b0 V-ing every time; V-ing the whole time						@~:(i/u)manginagh-	umanginagh	umanginagh	\
-umangite-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b @~:(i/u)mangite-													
\f0\b0 to not have V-ed						@~:(i/u)mangite-	umangite	umangite	\
+uute-	-8ns-	sound (make the N ~)		
\f2\i used with words denoting sounds or things that make sounds; 
\f0\i0 levekluguutuq \'91it is making a deep low sound\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  levekluk \'91deep low sound\'92); kafsaguutuq \'91it is making a rustling sound\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kafsak \'91rustling sound\'92); miiguutaa \'91he is pounding on it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  miik \'91loud noise, like thunder\'92); mengqughuutuq \'91it made a popping sound (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  mengquq \'91popping sound\'92); qenaaghquutuq \'91he made the rustling sound of walking on pebbles\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qenaaq \'91pebble, coarse sand\'92 
\f2\i and intervening postbase
\f0\i0 ); eftughuutuq \'91there\'92s the sound of gunfire\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  eftuq \'91sound of gunfire\'92); lengaaghuutuq \'91it rang\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  lengaaq \'91bell\'92); levekleguutuq \'91it made a deep hollow sound\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  levekluk \'91deep hollow sound\'92); 
\f2\i also
\f0\i0  aanghutuq \'91it made sparks\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aneq \'91spark\'92)													to make the N sound							ute	xte	-\uc0\u1263 \u1090 \u1099 -\
-uute-				
\f2\i see 
\f1\i0\b ~+(q/t)uute-													
\f0\b0 to V as a group; to V together						~+(q/t)uute-	ute	xte	\
-vagaatagh-				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b +pagaatagh-/~\sub sf\nosupersub vagaatagh-													
\f0\b0 to V repeatedly and hard						
\f1\b +pagaatagh-/~\sub sf\nosupersub vagaatagh-	
\f0\b0 vagatagh	vagxtagh	\
?vagh-	-df4-	toward (go or put ~ N)		
\f2\i used with positional bases and certain demonstrative adverb bases; 
\f0\i0 quulvaghtuq \'91it went up; he got promoted\'92, quulvaghaa \'91he put it up\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qula\super e\nosupersub  \'91area above\'92); asivaghtuq \'91he went downward\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  asi \'91area below\'92); sivuvaghtuq \'91it went forward\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sivu \'91front\'92); kelevaghtuq \'91he went back from shore or behind building\'92, kelevaghaa \'91he took it back or behind\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized
\f0\i0 , 
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kelu \'91area back from shore, area behind something\'92); tunuvaghtuq \'91he went back\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tunu \'91back area\'92); ukavaghtuq \'91he came closer\'92, ukavaghaa \'91he brought it closer\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uka(ni) \'91near here\'92); uteghvaghtuq \'91he stepped or pulled back\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 utegh- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  uteghte- \'91to go back\'92); uyavaghtuq \'91he went far away\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  uya- 
\f2\i as in 
\f0\i0 uyatu- \'91to be far away\'92); awavaghtuq \'91it went further out, drifted away\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  awa(ni) \'91in the general area over there\'92); kiwavaghtuq \'91he went far in (room, harbor, etc.)\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kiwa(ni) \'91in there\'92)	go N-wards	put N-wards											to go N-wards; to put N-wards; to go or put toward N		pb PE va3-					vagh	vagh	-\uc0\u1074 \u1072 \u1271 -\
?vak	-dfr	thing like a big N		
\f2\i non-productive variant of
\f0\i0  -ghpak 
\f2\i (q.v.); 
\f0\i0 tungtuvak \'91moose\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized from
\f0\i0  tungtu \'91caribou\'92, 
\f2\i cf.
\f0\i0  tungtughpak 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  tungtughllak \'91big caribou\'92); quyngivak \'91moose\'92 (
\f2\i lexicalized from
\f0\i0  quyngiq \'91reindeer\'92); angyavak \'91big boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyaq \'91boat\'92); sikuvak \'91large ice floe or field of ice\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  siku \'91ice\'92); uughquvak \'91large spotted seal\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  uughqu \'91spotted seal\'92); 
\f2\i perhaps also
\f0\i0  nunavak \'91walrus on ice\'92 (
\f2\i perhaps lexicalized from
\f0\i0  nuna \'91land\'92)	big (thing like a ~ N)												thing like a big N		pb PE va!(-)					vak	vak	-\uc0\u1074 \u1072 \u1082 \
-valluq				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b +palluq / ~\sub f\nosupersub valluq													
\f0\b0 one with big N; mostly N						
\f1\b +palluq / ~\sub f\nosupersub valluq	
\f0\b0 valluq	valluq	\
?vaq	-df2	expanse in the N direction		
\f2\i non-productive, all forms lexicalized; 
\f0\i0 asivaq \'91wind from east\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  asi \'91area under\'92); akivaq \'91southwest, far south\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  aki \'91area across\'92); uyavaq \'91distance\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  uya-, 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  uyatu- \'91to be distant\'92); quungvaq \'91east or area further up\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qunga\super e\nosupersub  \'91the middle\'92); keluvaq \'91area far back\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kelu \'91area within\'92); ikevaq \'91south, south wind\'92 (
\f2\i from root 
\f0\i0 ik- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  iikna \'91the one across; south\'92)); quutfaq \'91northeast\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  quta\super e\nosupersub  \'91land seen from sea\'92); ketfaq \'91sea expanse\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  keta\super e\nosupersub  \'91area toward sea\'92)	wind associated with N												expanse in the N direction; wind associated with N							vaq	vaq	-\uc0\u1074 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96vlaagh-	-dk94-	little (V a ~)		=
\f2\i  
\f0\i0 -mlaagh-, -mraagh-, -mzaagh-, -mleghagh-, -mreghagh-, -mzeghagh-, -vleghagh-													V a little		pb PY-S v$03a3-					vlagh	vlxgh	-\uc0\u1074 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1271 -\
\'96vlaaq	-dk92	little bit of N or little thing like N		= -mlaaq, -mraaq, -mzaaq, -mleghaq, -mreghaq, -mzeghaq, -vleghaq													little bit of N or little thing like N		pb PY-S v$03a3-					vlaq	vlxq	-\uc0\u1074 \u1083 \u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
\'96vleghagh-	-dks4f4-	little (V a ~)		Aglaghaqelghiinga qiya
\f1\b vlegha
\f0\b0 amaghma sumeghtaghaamaghma, panikniiqlunga ighsayaguteghllagtatnga. \'91I\'92d go home with tears in my eyes (crying 
\f1\b a little
\f0\b0 ) wondering why, if they considered me a daughter, they didn\'92t want me around any more.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qiya- \'91to cry\'92) (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:90); = -mlaagh-, -mraagh-, -mzaagh-, -mleghagh-, -mreghagh-, -mzeghagh-, -vlaagh-													V a little		pb PY-S v$03a3-					vleghagh	vleghagh	-\uc0\u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1271 -\
\'96vleghaq	-dks4f2	little bit of N or little thing like N		= -mlaaq, -mraaq, -mzaaq, -mleghagh-, -mreghaq, -mzeghaq, -vlaaq; naangquvleghaq \'91little scrap of ivory\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naangquq \'91piece of ivory (for carving)\'92)													little bit of N or little thing like N		pb PY-S v$03a3-					vleghaq	vleghaq	-\uc0\u1074 \u1083 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96vraaq	-dh62	little bit of N or little thing like N		Kaallukek elqune
\f1\b vraag
\f0\b0 ek tallimineng pategyaqminikek uka leveklutun mekelghiighmun tagistaak. \'91When it got to the walrus skull and swatted it with its paw it sent it flying toward the boy with a whizzing sound.\'92 (elqunevraak \'91walrus skull\'92, 
\f2\i lexicalized from
\f0\i0  elquneq \'91whale skull\'92) (SULUWET 97); -vlaaq, -vzaaq, -vleghaq, -vreghaq, -vzeghaq, -mlaaq													little bit of N or little thing like N		pb PY-S v$03a3-					vraq	vrxq	-\uc0\u1074 \u1088 \u257 \u1179 \
\'96vreghaq	-dhs4f2	little bit of N or little thing like N		= -vlaaq, -vzaaq, -vleghaq, -vraaq, -vzeghaq, -mlaaq													little bit of N or little thing like N		pb PY-S v$03a3-					vreghaq	vreghaq	-\uc0\u1074 \u1088 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96vyigh-	-dqb4-	almost V		Iwernganguq tunutegkenkun qaakluku asighute
\f1\b vyigh
\f0\b0 aa. \'91However he put it [the seal] up on the back of it [his wheeled/tracked vehicle] and tied it there 
\f1\b as best he could
\f0\b0 .\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  asighute- \'91to tie (it) on to something\'92) (AKIINGQWAGH. 38); = -vzigh-	able (V to the extent that one is ~)												to almost V; to V to the extent that one is able							vyigh-	vyigh-	-\uc0\u1074 \u1253 \u1080 \u1271 -\
\'96vyiigh-	-dq74-	carelessly V		= -vziigh-	roughly V												to V carelessly; to V in a rough way							vyigh	vyxgh	-\uc0\u1074 \u1253 \u1251 \u1271 -\
\'96vyiiq	-dq72	crude N		Sangwaak igleghaaqeftuq leveklugllagek qamiye
\f1\b vyiigh
\f0\b0 egneng qamuqlutek. \'91Something was moving around making lots of noise and dragging a 
\f1\b crude
\f0\b0  sled.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qamiyek \'91sled\'92) (SULUWET 1); = -vziiq	makeshift N												crude N; makeshift N							vyiq	vyxq	-\uc0\u1074 \u1253 \u1251 \u1179 \
\'96vzaaq	-dp62	little bit of N or little thing like N		= -vlaaq, -vraaq, -vleghaq, -vreghaq, -vzeghaq, -mlaaq													little bit of N or little thing like N		pb PY-S v$03a3-					vzaq	vzxq	-\uc0\u1074 \u1079 \u257 \u1179 \
\'96vzeghaq	z-dps4f2	little bit of N or little thing like N		qenaavzeghaq \'91small pebble\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  qenaaq \'91pebble\'92); = -vlaaq, -vzaaq, -vleghaq, -vreghaq, -vraaq, -mlaaq													little bit of N or little thing like N		PY-S v$03a3-					vzeghaq	vzeghaq	\uc0\u1103 -\u1074 \u1079 \u1099 \u1271 \u1072 \u1179 \
\'96vzigh-	-dpb4-	almost V		ifkavzightuq \'91it almost fell off\'92, ifkavzighaqa \'91I almost dropped it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  ifkagh- \'91to fall off, to drop\'92); tuqutevzighaa \'91he almost killed it\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  tuqute- \'91to kill\'92); iquvzightuq \'91it almost fell, he stumbled\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  iqu- \'91to fall over\'92); Mekelghiiq iitghumalghii amik naafqe
\f1\b vzigh
\f0\b0 luku. \'91The boy went in 
\f1\b almost
\f0\b0  breaking the door in the process.\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  naafqe- \'91to break\'92) (UNGIPAGHAGH. 68); Qaqsungiim manigi qamagte
\f1\b vzigh
\f0\b0 luteng kavillghhuut. \'91The eggs of the kittiwake are 
\f1\b almost
\f0\b0  all yolk.\'92 (SLI JR. DICT. 94); = -vyigh-	able (V to the extend that one is ~)												to almost V; to V to the extent that one is able							vzigh	vzigh	-\uc0\u1074 \u1079 \u1080 \u1271 -\
\'96vziigh-	-dp74-	carelessly V		kakivziighaqa \'91I sewed it in a rough way\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaki- \'91to sew\'92); angyangllavziightuq \'91he made a boat without being careful\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  angyangllagh- \'91to make a boat\'92); = vyiigh-	roughly V												to V carelessly; to V in a rough way							vzigh	vzxgh	-\uc0\u1074 \u1079 \u1251 \u1271 -\
\'96vziiq	-dp72	crude N		= -vyiiq	makeshift N												crude N; makeshift N							vziq	vzxq	-\uc0\u1074 \u1079 \u1251 \u1179 \
-waagh-\super 1				
\f2\i \nosupersub see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 1													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to diligently V; to thoroughly V; to V at the proper time						
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 1	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub wagh1	wxgh1	\
-waagh-\super 2				
\f2\i \nosupersub see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 2													
\f0\b0 \nosupersub to V in a non-serious way; to pretend to V; to V for something other than the usual purpose; to play at V-ing						~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aagh-\super 2	\nosupersub wagh2	wxgh2	\
-waaq				see 
\f1\b ~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aaq													
\f0\b0 imitation N; artificial N; model N; toy N; pretend N; little bit of N; thing like N						~\'96(ghw/ngw/w)aaq	waq	wxq	\
-whaq*				
\f2\i see \'96
\f1\i0\b ghhaq*													
\f0\b0 little N; small N; bit of N						\'96ghhaq*	whaq	whaq	\
-whllak				
\f2\i see
\f0\i0  
\f1\b \'96ghllak													
\f0\b0 big N; lots of N						\'96ghllak	whllak	whllak	\
+y	-q	
\f2\i vocative		used to form the vocative of vowel-ending nouns; the final vowel of the noun is doubled; 
\f0\i0 apaay \'91hey, grandfather!\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  apa \'91grandfather\'92); Kaviighhaa
\f1\b y,
\f0\b0  sangan waamsinga? \'91
\f1\b Hey
\f0\b0  little fox, why are you deceiving me?\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kaviighhaq \'91little fox\'92) (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 65); 
\f2\i note that to form the vocative of consonant-ending nouns the vowel is doubled and the final consonant is retained													vocative							
\f0\i0 y	y	-\uc0\u1253 \
\'96yaaq	-92	short or small N (article of clothing)		estulluyaaq \'91short reindeer leg boot for child\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  estulluk \'91skin boot of reindeer leg\'92); itegayaaq \'91slipper\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  itegaq \'91foot\'92)													short or small N (article of clothing)							yaq	yxq	-\uc0\u1103 \u772 \u1179 \
+yag-	-zu-	increase (for the number of N to ~)		yugyagtuq \'91the population is growing\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92); 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 -yaga\super e													\nosupersub for the number of N to increase		pb PE ya!-					yag	yag	-\uc0\u1103 \u1075 -\

\f1\b +yaga\super e	
\f0\b0 \nosupersub -zufs	multitude of N		sagelmagyaget \'91a lot of plovers\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sagelmak \'91plover\'92); yugyaget \'91a lot of people\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  yu<u>k \'91person\'92);  tamaghhaghyaga \'91everything\'92 (
\f2\i from root
\f0\i0  tamaghhagh- \'91every\'92, 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  tamaghhaghmeng \'91every one of them\'92); meghyaga \'91lots of water\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  meq \'91water\'92); qafsinegyaget 
\f2\i or
\f0\i0  qafsinagyaget \'91a fairly large number (of something)\'92; 
\f2\i cf. 
\f0\i0 -yag-	abundance of N	lots of N											multitude of N; abundance of N; lots of N		pb PE ya!-					yaga	yaga	-\uc0\u1103 \u1075 \u1072 \u1099 \
?yak	-zr	part of boat at N		
\f2\i non-productive; 
\f0\i0 sivuyak \'91bow of boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  sivu \'91front\'92); kinguyak \'91stern of boat\'92 (
\f2\i from
\f0\i0  kingu \'91stern\'92)													N part (of boat)							yak	yak	-\uc0\u1103 \u1082 \
+yuq	-/2	
\f2\i vocative for demonstrative pronouns		used with certain demonstrative pronoun bases; 
\f0\i0 uyuq \'91you, here!\'92 (
\f2\i from base 
\f0\i0 u- 
\f2\i as in 
\f0\i0 una \'91this here\'92, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  ukut \'91these here\'92); kaanyuq \'91you, down there!\'92 (
\f2\i from base
\f0\i0  kaan- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  kaana \'91that down there\'92, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  kaankut \'91those down there\'92); iingyuq \'91you, over there!\'92 (
\f2\i from base
\f0\i0  iing- 
\f2\i as in
\f0\i0  iigna \'91that one over there\'92, 
\f2\i and
\f0\i0  iingkut \'91those over there\'92)													
\f2\i vocative for demonstrative pronouns		
\f0\i0 PY yu(u)q					yuq	yuq	-\uc0\u1102 \u1179 }